

===== Page 1 =====

MODELING STUDY OF LASER BEAM 
SCATTERING BY DEFECTS ON 
SEMICONDUCTOR WAFERS 
Srikumar Sandeep1 and Alexander Kokhanovsky2 
1Ecole Polytechnique, Montreal, Canada 
sandeepsrikumar2013@gmail.com 
 
2 University of Bremen, Germany  
Alexander.Kokhanovsky@eumetsat.int 
 
ABSTRACT 
Accurate modeling of light scattering from nanometer scale defects on Silicon wafers is critical for enabling 
increasingly shrinking semiconductor technology nodes of the future. Yet, such modeling of defect 
scattering remains unsolved since existing modeling techniques fail to account for complex defect and wafer 
geometries. Here, we present results of laser beam scattering from spherical and ellipsoidal particles 
located on the surface of a silicon wafer. A commercially available electromagnetic field solver (HFSS) 
was deployed on a multiprocessor cluster to obtain results with previously unknown accuracy down to light 
scattering intensity of -170 dB. We compute three dimensional scattering patterns of silicon nanospheres 
located on a semiconductor wafer for both perpendicular and parallel polarization and show the effect of 
sphere size on scattering. We further computer scattering patterns of nanometer scale ellipsoidal particles 
having different orientation angles and unveil the effects of ellipsoidal orientation on scattering.  
KEYWORDS 
Defect, Laser, Scattering, Semiconductor, Wafer, Gaussian beam, HFSS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Leading-edge semiconductor integrated circuits have entered the 14 nm technology node, there 
by continuing the trend of producing smaller, faster, cheaper, and energy efficient chips [1]. While 
this trend unquestionably stands out as one of the key enablers of the information age, it must be 
recognized that continuing this trend is becoming increasingly challenging because of the 
difficulty in fabricating increasingly complex nanometer scale layers reliably and in a cost 
effective manner. As feature sizes continue to decrease in semiconductor chips, low 
manufacturing yield becomes a critical problem. Yield losses are caused due to imperfections or 
defects that could occur in any of the hundreds of manufacturing process steps that transform a 
bare Silicon wafer into a modern integrated circuit. Stringent process controls are required to 
ensure that each process step creates a desired result within established tolerances. Optical and 
electron based wafer inspection tools play a crucial role in process control by providing much 
needed feedback on a previously performed process step. The feedback includes critical 
information on the number, sizes, shapes, and material properties of defects - much needed 
information that can be used to adjust process steps to eliminate those defects, especially the ones 
that are likely to affect yield. Finding and eliminating such yield-affecting defects as soon as they 
occur is imperative to limit yield loss, which otherwise may rapidly propagate to a large number 
of wafers in a high-speed modern semiconductor fab. 
 
In the current 14 nm leading-edge technology node, reduced yield can often be correlated to the 
inability of current inspection tools to effectively detect defects that are smaller than 20 nm. Novel 

===== Page 2 =====

fabrication processes used in leading-edge nodes result in an increased defect density as well new 
types of defects. New materials such as strained silicon, high-k dielectrics, and III-V compounds 
improve transistor performance, but create new defects due to their atomic scale interactions with 
Silicon. Further, new three-dimensional (3D) transistor designs such as FinFETs and new 3D 
stacking methods such as Through Silicon Vias (TSVs) require complex fabrication processes 
that often lead to added defects [3]. Enabling these advances require the development of improved 
defect inspection systems with ultra-high sensitivity and throughput [1,2]. An understanding of 
light scattering by nanometer scale defects located on a semiconductor wafer is important in the 
design and development of such inspection systems [4]. Such an understanding requires accurate 
modeling of optical scattering by semiconductor defects on or under the wafer surface. 
 
A survey of previous modeling work related to this problem can be found in [4,5]. Analytical 
methods such as Mie theory [6] can only be used for scattering due to isolated spherical particles. 
Mie theory does not take into account the effect of surface beneath the scattering particle. 
Previously published works include the application of approximate methods such as Discrete 
Dipole Approximation (DDA) [7, 8] for defects of radius larger than 100 nm when excited with 
plane wave of longer wavelengths (e.g. 532 nm). Furthermore, these analytical methods cannot 
be used for defects under the wafer or multilayer wafer substrates. Hence there is a need to 
perform accurate full wave simulations to incorporate complex scenarios that are realistic in 
leading-edge semiconductor fabrication. To the best of our knowledge, there is no published work 
on full wave analysis of Gaussian beam scattering due to particles/defects on semiconductor 
wafers. The multi-scale nature of the problem (i.e. a small defect on a large wafer), requires the 
use of numerical field solvers executed on a multiprocessor cluster to obtain accurate results. Our 
work stands out from the previously published results in terms of the use of cutting edge modeling 
resources, better accuracy attributed to full wave methods, Gaussian laser beam excitation instead 
of plane wave excitation, shorter wavelength of 193 nm, sub-40 nm defect sizes, and the flexibility 
to model different defect shapes, sizes, materials and multilayer substrates. 
 
2. MODELING FRAMEWORK 
In this work, we use a laser beam of 193 nm wavelength, a commonly used wavelength in leading 
semiconductor photolithography systems [9]. The refractive index of silicon at 193 nm is n = 
0.883 + 2.778i [10]. The geometry of our light scattering problem is shown in Fig. 1. It consists 
of a cylindrical Silicon wafer, the top surface of which coincides with the xy plane. A Gaussian 
beam having a minimum beam width (at its waist) of 400 nm is incident on the silicon wafer at 
an angle of incidence equal to 30𝑜  with respect to z-axis and the laser beam axis lies on the xzplane (i.e. wave vector 𝑘̂ = 0.5𝑥̂ −0.866𝑧̂). The Gaussian beam focal point location coincides 
with the coordinate origin and the field amplitude at this point is 1 V/m. We consider two 
polarizations in this paper. For perpendicular polarization (s-polarization), the polarization vector 
is given by 𝑒̂ = 𝑦̂. For parallel polarization (p-polarization), the polarization vector 𝑒̂ =
0.866𝑥̂ + 0.5𝑧̂. The parameter of interest for optical detection is the far zone scattered power 
density. Throughout this paper, we have used 20log10|E̅sc(r = 1 m, θ,φ)| to quantify scattered 
power density. E̅sc(r = 1 m, θ,φ)is the scattered electric field intensity as a function of polar 
angle θ and azimuth angle φ on a sphere of radius 1 meter. Since we are interested primarily in 
the scattered field above the wafer, θ varies from 0 to 90 degrees. However, φ ranges from 0 to 
360 degrees. The goal of our framework is to accurately model scattered light intensity values at 
all  θ and φ angles for a range of realistic defects on a semiconductor wafer surface. It should be 
noted that the defect sizes are in the nanometer range and hence all practical optical detectors 
would be in the far field scattering zone. Hence using a value of  r = 1 m is just a reference value. 
Once the field at r = 1 m is known, the fields at any other value of r in the far zone can be 
calculated. 
 

===== Page 3 =====

The diameter of silicon wafers used in modern semiconductor fabrication could be as large as 450 
mm. Since this dimension is much larger than the wavelength under consideration, it is 
impractical to include the entire wafer in the simulation. Fortunately, since the Gaussian beam is 
spatially confined (unlike a plane wave), a smaller local area of the wafer effectively emulates 
large realistic wafer diameters. By using wafers with progressively increasing radii, it was found 
that the scattering pattern converges for radii greater than 1200 nm. Because of the finite spatial 
extent of the Gaussian beam, a further increase in the wafer radius did not result in a significant 
change in the scattering pattern. This was confirmed by plotting the magnitude of electric field 
on the φ = 0𝑜 plane vs. the wafer radii used in simulation. A 1600 nm radius wafer was used for 
the simulation results shown in this paper. 
 
We used ANSYS HFSS for the simulation of the above mentioned model. A Perfectly Matched 
Layer (PML) was used to truncate the problem geometry. Gaussian beam excitation was used as 
the source. The Gaussian beam excitation option in HFSS allows the entry of arbitrary 
polarization, propagation vector, focal point location and beam width at focal point. Our 
framework is flexible enough to simulate a wide variety of incident angles, excitation 
wavelengths, beam widths, incident wave polarizations, defect shapes, defect dimensions, and 
defect and wafer surface materials. 
 
 
Figure 1. 3D scattering pattern: 40 nm radius sphere on wafer. The incident beam direction is 
given by 𝑘̂ = 0.5𝑥̂ −0.866𝑧̂. 
 
3. RESULTS 
We now show scattering patterns for spherical and ellipsoidal defects located on semiconductor 
wafers for s and p-polarizations. For each polarization, we start with a bare wafer (i.e. a wafer 
having no defects) to determine the noise floor of our model. This is followed by simulations of 
20 nm, 30 nm and 40 nm radii silicon nanospheres located on the silicon wafer. Finally, we show 
simulations of a nanometer scale ellipsoidal particles located on a silicon wafer at 00, 450 , 900 
and 1350 orientation angles. 
 
3.1 Base Si wafer 
 
When a bare wafer is illuminated with a Gaussian beam, the beam undergoes specular reflection. 
The specularly reflected beam propagates at 𝜃= 300 and 𝜑= 0𝑜. In addition, weak scattering 
is observed at non-specular directions. Figure 2(a) shows the scattering pattern of the bare wafer 

===== Page 4 =====

for s-polarized illumination. This figure is a two-dimensional (2D) plot of 20log10|E̅sc(r =
1 m,θ,φ)| as a function of θ and φ. The specularly reflected beam can be observed in the range 
𝜃 ∈[10𝑜,50𝑜] and in the vicinity of 𝜑= 0𝑜. For s-polarization, the peak of the specularly 
reflected beam is -122 dB, and the maximum value of the scattered field outside this specularly 
reflected beam is -170 dB. Figure 3(a) shows the scattering pattern of the bare wafer for ppolarized illumination. For the case of p-polarization, the peak of the specularly reflected beam 
is -127 dB, and the maximum value of the scattered field outside this specular beam is -171 dB. 
Accordingly, the computational noise floor of our model is -170 dB for s-polarization and -171 
dB for p-polarization. Scattered light intensity from a defect needs to exceed this noise floor for 
the defect to be able to be detected reliably. It should be stated that in the 2D plots, the highest 
value of scattered field is truncated to -150 dB for visual clarity. 
 
3.2 Silicon sphere on Silicon wafer: s-polarization 
 
Figures 2 (b-d) show scattering patterns of silicon spheres with radii 20 nm, 30 nm and 40 nm 
located on the wafer surface for the case of s-polarized Gaussian beam excitation. Figure 1 is in 
fact a three-dimensional view of figure 2(d). In the 2D plots, the specular reflection is split into 
two halves along the 𝜑= 00, 3600 planes. This is because of the symmetry of the incident 
illumination beam with respect to xz plane. Consequently, the specularly reflected beam is also 
symmetric with respect to the xz plane. The maximum values of scattered radiation outside the 
specularly reflected beam are -164 dB, -159 dB, and -154 dB for the 20 nm, 30 nm and 40 nm 
spheres, respectively. It should be noted that for every 10 nm decrease in sphere radius, the 
maximum scattered field gets reduced by 5 dB. We find that scattering pattern is below the noise 
floor for spheres having a radius less than 10 nm with an s-polarized incident beam. The spolarized incident beam induces an electric dipole oriented along the y direction. The radiation 
pattern of a dipole is dough-nut shaped with its null along its direction of polarization. These nulls 
can be seen in Figures 2(a-d), along 𝜑= 900,2700;𝜃= 900. The green ellipse in figure 2(d) 
denotes the null along 𝜑= 2700. As the radius of the sphere increases, the scattering pattern 
becomes asymmetric with more scattering along the forward direction (i.e. 𝜑= 00). 
 
 

===== Page 5 =====

Figure 2. Light scattering by a) bare Si wafer, b) 20 nm sphere on a Si wafer, c) 30 nm sphere on 
a Si wafer and d) 40 nm sphere on a Si wafer, all of which are illuminated with a s-polarized 
Gaussian beam having a wavelength of 193 nm. 
 
3.2 Silicon sphere on Silicon wafer: p-polarization 
 
Figures 3 (b-d) show scattering pattern for silicon spheres with radii 20 nm, 30 nm and 40 nm 
located on the surface of a silicon wafer for the case of p-polarized Gaussian beam excitation. 
The maximum values of scattered radiation excluding the specularly reflected beam are given by 
-169 dB,-162 dB and -156 dB for the 20 nm, 30 nm and 40 nm spheres, respectively. We observe 
that the scattered energy in the case of p-polarization is less than that of s-polarization. We find 
that scattering pattern is below the noise floor for spheres having a radius less than 20 nm with a 
p-polarized incident beam. This is in contrast to 10 nm detection limit for s-polarization. Figure 
4 shows a comparison of scattering patterns with s and p polarization incident beams for a 40 nm 
sphere on silicon wafer. Figure 4(a) illustrates this comparison in the  𝜑= 00 plane, and Figure 
4(b) illustrates this comparison in the 𝜑=  900. Figure 4(a) shows that the scattered intensity for 
s-polarization is higher than the scattered intensity of p-polarization in the 𝜑= 00  plane. On the 
other hand, Figure 4(b) shows that the scattered intensity for s-polarization rolls off with respect 
to azimuth angle at a faster rate than p-polarization. These observations can be explained by the 
rotation of the sphere scattering pattern when incident polarization is rotated from s to p. Because 
of the decreased scattered field intensity, s-polarization is preferred over p-polarization in 
industrial wafer inspection systems. 
 
3.3 Silicon ellipsoid on Silicon wafer: s-polarization 
 
We now show the scattering pattern of an ellipsoidal particle with axis lengths 140 nm x 60 nm x 
60 nm located on a silicon wafer. The incident beam is s-polarized (i.e. 𝑒̂ = 𝑦̂). Four different 
orientation angles 0◦, 45◦, 90◦ and 135◦ are used. Orientation angle denotes the angle between the 
major axis of the ellipsoid and the x-axis. For example, for the 45◦ case, the 140 nm length axis 
of ellipsoid makes an angle of 45◦ with x-axis. The major axis of the ellipsoid is parallel to the 
plane of the silicon wafer in all four orientation angle cases. Figure 5 shows the scattering pattern 
for the four cases. We observe that the scattering pattern for the ellipsoid with 90◦ orientation, 
shown in Figure 5(d), is similar to the scattering pattern of a 40 nm radius sphere shown in Figure 
2(d). This is because of a couple of reasons: 1) volume of the 40 nm radius sphere is roughly 
equal to the volume of the ellipsoid; 2) major axis of ellipsoid with 900 orientation is along the 
direction of incident beam polarization. From Figure 5, it can be observed that nulls occur along 
the direction of the ellipsoid major axis away from the specularly reflected lobe (𝜑= 00,3600). 
For instance, when the orientation angle is 450  the major axis lies along  𝜑= 450,2250 and the 
null occurs at 𝜑= 2250. A similar observation can be made in Figure 5(c) for the case of 1350 
orientation angle. 
 
4. CONCLUSIONS 
This paper provides accurate full wave simulation results of laser beam scattering of spherical 
and ellipsoidal Silicon particles located on a cylindrical silicon wafer. The results presented in 
this paper is as close as to real world measurement scenario when compared to previous published 
results. The scattering pattern of a defect is found to have a close dependence on the shape of the 
defect. For s-polarization, the maximum scattered field outside the specularly reflected lobe 
reduces by 5 dB for every 10 nm reduction in sphere radius. Such a dependence can be used to 
detect the size of the defect. For p-polarization, the scattered energy is less than that of spolarization. For the case of ellipsoidal defects, the scattering pattern exhibits a rotation with 
respect to the orientation of the major axis of the ellipsoid. Wafer surface roughness can have a 

===== Page 6 =====

profound effect on the scattering pattern and ultimately determines the smallest defect that can be 
detected. Although we ignore roughness in this paper, defect scattering pattern by itself could 
help us build more sensitive instruments. We believe the results in this work will be invaluable to 
wafer inspection technology companies, who can use these data to design novel instruments as 
well validate their numerical models [11]. Future work will include scattering study of more 
complicated defects such as Crystal Originated Pits (COPs)  and different materials. 
 
 
Figure 3. Light scattering by a) bare Si wafer, b) 20 nm sphere on a Si wafer, c) 30 nm sphere on 
a Si wafer and d) 40 nm sphere on a Si wafer, all of which are illuminated with a p-polarized 
Gaussian beam having a wavelength of 193 nm. 
 
 
 

===== Page 7 =====

Figure 4. a) Scattering pattern (𝜑= 00) comparison for 40 nm radius sphere on wafer: s vs p 
polarization b) Scattering pattern (𝜑= 900) comparison for 40 nm radius sphere on wafer: s vs 
p polarization. 
 
 
Figure 5. Light scattering by a) bare Si wafer, b) 20 nm sphere on a Si wafer, c) 30 nm sphere on 
a Si wafer and d) 40 nm sphere on a Si wafer, all of which are illuminated with a p-polarized 
Gaussian beam having a wavelength of 193 nm. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Gargini, P., “The International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors (ITRS): Past, present 
and future” GaAs IC Symposium, 2000. 22nd Annual , 3-5, 2000. 
[2] 
Isogai, S., Endo, F., Kobayashi, K., and Arai, K., “Hitachi Review: Advanced Defect Review 
System for Yield Enhancement (RS Series)”, 2007. 
[3]     Feng Y., and Burkett S.L.,Fabrication and Electrical Performance of Through Silicon Via 
Interconnects Filled with a Copper/Carbon Nanotube Composite;, Journal of Vacuum Science and 
; Technology B. 33(2): 022004 (2015) 
[4]  
Strover, J. C. Optical Scattering: Measurement and Analysis, 3rd edition, SPIE Press 2012. 
[5]  
Nebeker, B. M., and Hirleman, E. D Light scattering from microstructures , Springer, 2000. 
[6]  
Bohren, C. F., and Huffman, D. R Absorption and Scattering of Light by Small Particles , Wiley- 
 
VCH, 1998 
[7]     
Taubenblatt, M., and Tran, T. K ”‘Calculation of light scattering from particles and structures ona 
surface by the coupled-dipole method” J Opt Soc Am , 1993. 
[8]          Kim, J. H., Ehrman, S. H., Mulholland, G. W , and Germer, T. A., ‘”Polarized light scattering by 
 
dielectric and metallic spheres on oxidized silicon surfaces,” Appl. Opt. 43 , 585-591 (2004) 
[9]          Zant, P. V., ”Microchip Fabrication: A Practical Guide to Semiconductor Processing”, 
McGrawHill, 2014 
[10]        Palik, E. D., ”Handbook of Optical Constants of Solids”, Elsevier Inc, 1997 

===== Page 8 =====

[11] 
Tuyen K. Tran, "Defect Inspection for Advanced Technology Nodes", International Conference 
on 
Frontiers 
of 
Characterization 
and 
Metrology 
for 
Nanoelectronics.2015 
http://www.nist.gov/pml/div683/conference/upload/tran.pdf 
 
 
 
 
 
Authors
Srikumar Sandeep received his MS and PhD in 
electrical 
engineering 
from 
University of 
Colorado, 
Boulder 
in 
2011 
and 
2012 
respectively. From 2012 to 2013, he was a 
postdoctoral research associate at University of 
Colorado, 
Boulder. 
Presently, 
he 
is 
a 
postdoctoral researcher at Ecole Polytechnique, 
Montreal. He has more than 5 years of industrial 
experience 
in several fields 
of electrical 
engineering 
such 
as 
computational 
electromagnetics, signal integrity, embedded 
systems and software development. He is a coinventor of 2 US patents. His technical interests 
include 
computational 
and 
applied 
electromagnetics. 
 
Alexander Kokhanovsky graduated from the 
Department of Physics at the Belarusian State 
University, Minsk, Belarus in 1983. He received 
his Ph.D in Optical Sciences from the B.I. 
Stepanov Institute of Physics, National Academy 
of Sciences of Belarus in 1991. His habilitation 
work 
(Main 
Geophysical 
Observatory, 
St.Petersburg, Russia, 2011) was devoted to the 
development of advanced cloud and snow remote 
sensing techniques based 
on 
spaceborne 
observations. His research interests include 
studies on light propagation and scattering in 
terrestrial atmosphere. Dr. Kokhanosky is the 
author of books Light Scattering Media Optics: 
Problems and Solutions, Polarization Optics of 
Random Media, Cloud Optics and Aerosol 
Optics. He has published more than 300 papers 
in the field of environmental optics, radiative 
transfer and light scattering 
 
 
