

===== Page 1 =====

RETHINKING FULLY CONVOLUTIONAL NETWORKS FOR THE
ANALYSIS OF PHOTOLUMINESCENCE WAFER IMAGES
PREPRINT
Maike Lorena Stern∗
Osram Opto Semiconductors
Leibnizstraße 4
93055 Regensburg, Germany
Department of Computer Science
Friedrich Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg
91058 Erlangen, Germany
maike.stern@osram-os.com
Hans Lindberg
Osram Opto Semiconductors
Leibnizstraße 4
93055 Regensburg, Germany
Klaus Meyer-Wegener
Department of Computer Science
Friedrich Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg
Martensstraße 3
91058 Erlangen, Germany
March 3, 2020
ABSTRACT
The manufacturing of light-emitting diodes is a complex semiconductor-manufacturing process,
interspersed with different measurements. Among the employed measurements, photoluminescence
imaging has several advantages, namely being a non-destructive, fast and thus cost-effective measurement. On a photoluminescence measurement image of an LED wafer, every pixel corresponds to
an LED chip’s brightness after photo-excitation, revealing chip performance information. However,
generating a chip-ﬁne defect map of the LED wafer, based on photoluminescence images, proves
challenging for multiple reasons: on the one hand, the measured brightness values vary from image to
image, in addition to local spots of differing brightness. On the other hand, certain defect structures
may assume multiple shapes, sizes and brightness gradients, where salient brightness values may
correspond to defective LED chips, measurement artefacts or non-defective structures. In this work,
we revisit the creation of chip-ﬁne defect maps using fully convolutional networks and show that the
problem of segmenting objects at multiple scales can be improved by the incorporation of densely
connected convolutional blocks and atrous spatial pyramid pooling modules. We also share implementation details and our experiences with training networks with small datasets of measurement images.
The proposed architecture signiﬁcantly improves the segmentation accuracy of highly variable defect
structures over our previous version.
1
Introduction
In the manufacturing of light-emitting diodes (LEDs), measurements constitute an inevitable but simultaneously
unwanted process step, given that they add no value to the product but rather enable the monitoring of product and
process. Because the manufacturing of LEDs is a complex semiconductor-manufacturing process, it includes a variety of
different measurements, employed for process monitoring, the determination of LED-chip properties and the detection
of conspicuous or defective LED chips. Based on these measurements, defective LED chips can be rejected directly
∗corresponding author
arXiv:2003.00594v1  [cs.CV]  1 Mar 2020

===== Page 2 =====

Rethinking Fully Convolutional Networks for the Analysis of Photoluminescence Wafer Images PREPRINT
Figure 1: Overview over the variety of photoluminescence measurement results with different brightness values as well
as defect cluster shapes and sizes. Due to the measurement setup brightness values can differ signiﬁcantly within a
wafer as well as from wafer to wafer. Additionally, defect clusters assume different sizes and shapes along with an
interchange of sharp and smooth brightness gradients.
instead of being processed further. Among the available measurement methods photoluminescence imaging has several
advantages, namely being a non-destructive, fast and thus cost-effective measurement. Because it is also a non-contact
measurement, photoluminescence measurements can be performed early in the manufacturing process, before electrical
contact pads are added to the chip surface, and can also be applied to advanced chip designs without a contact pad. By
irradiating the surface of an LED wafer photoluminescence is induced, ultimately causing the emission of photons.
Comparing the recorded optical intensity image with chip-ﬁne electrical and optical measurements reveals that almost
all defective LED chips manifest as salient brightness values. However, not all salient brightness values are defective
LED chips but may also correspond to functional or non-defect structures, such as ﬁlm tears that arise from an earlier
process step. Additionally, photoluminescence measurements generate images with varying distributions of brightness
values from wafer to wafer as well as in local areas, as shown in ﬁgure 1. Moreover, possible defect structures cover
multiple scales, from single defective chips to elongated cracks, voids and defect clusters.
Here, defect clusters appear the fewest of all defect structures and assume various shapes, sizes and brightness gradients,
which exacerbates an accurate segmentation. As a result, a pattern recognition algorithm that maps a photoluminescence
image to a defect map must be able to reliably distinguish between salient brightness values corresponding to defective
LED chips, measurement artefacts and good chips, respectively, and in addition accurately segment multiple scaled
objects.
In this work, we revisit the creation of defect maps from photoluminescence images, using fully convolutional networks
[1]. In a previous study [2], a speciﬁcally designed encoder-decoder fully-convolutional-network architecture was
introduced that enabled a chip-ﬁne output resolution, correctly recognised non-defect structures and measurement
artefacts and accurately segmented common defect structures. Not only appear these defect structures frequently in the
dataset, their appearance remains relatively uniform, as well. Defect clusters, however, appear comparatively rarely and
in variable shapes, sizes and with different brightness gradients, as shown in ﬁgure 1. Because the procurement of a
dataset from a running production is limited by the manufacturing process, the selection of photoluminescence images
with defect clusters is not representative of the true distribution. As a result, defect clusters with a very uncommon
shape or size were often segmented inaccurately.
Therefore, we study the incorporation of additional architectural concepts to the network architecture, namely densely
connected convolutional blocks, abbreviated as dense blocks [3] as well as atrous spatial pyramid pooling (ASPP)
modules [4]. Here, dense blocks input all preceding, concatenated feature maps, which improves the information
ﬂow through the network and results in implicit deep supervision [5]. Moreover, as noted by [3] and observed in our
experiments, dense network designs have a regularising effect that diminishes overﬁtting, which is beneﬁcial if only
small datasets are available for training. ASPP modules, on the other hand, address the challenge of multiple scaled
2

===== Page 3 =====

Rethinking Fully Convolutional Networks for the Analysis of Photoluminescence Wafer Images PREPRINT
objects by probing incoming feature maps with different ﬁeld-of-views at once and additionally incorporate image-level
context via global average pooling [6]. Our experiments show that for the special composition of photoluminescence
images the combination of two ASPP modules yields the highest network performance, with one module in the encoder
(downsampling) and one module in the decoder (upsampling) path. Altogether, the dense ASPP2 version of our model
increases test defect-class accuracy from 83.5 % to 91.5 % and test mean pixel accuracy from 94.1 % to 96.7 %, trained
on a dataset of 111 photoluminescence wafer images and 25 validation images. Additionally, the segmentation accuracy
of uniquely shaped defect clusters improves empirically, revealing that the careful design of fully convolutional networks
can compensate for comparably small datasets.
2
Related Work
Fully convolutional networks for semantic segmentation [7, 1, 8, 9, 4, 10] have become powerful tools in a data
scientist’s toolbox, given that they enable object localisation on a pixel-level without the need of handcrafted imageprocessing pipelines. Their application covers a range of tasks, especially with respect to everyday-scene images
[11, 6, 12, 13, 14, 15] and medical images [16, 17, 18, 19, 20]. Note that to the best of our knowledge, no other working
groups have reported on fully-convolutional-network architectures for the segmentation of photoluminescence wafer
images.
Dense Blocks: For the segmentation of everyday-scene images, it has been shown that the incorporation of dense
blocks enables condensed, parameter-efﬁcient network architectures, which diminish overﬁtting and strengthen feature
propagation. The concept of dense blocks has ﬁrst been introduced by [3] for convolutional neural networks [21, 22, 23].
Hereby, the idea of residual networks [24] is advanced by connecting each network layer to every other layer and thereby
increasing the number of direct connections from L to L(L+1)
2
for a network with L layers. Since their introduction, the
concept of dense blocks has also been adapted to fully-convolutional-network architectures [13, 25, 26, 27].
Atrous Spatial Pyramid Pooling: ASPP modules [28, 29, 9, 4], on the other hand, address the challenge arising from
differently scaled objects, such as single defective LED chips and defect clusters. For this purpose, ASPP modules
arrange several layers in parallel, which probe the incoming feature maps at multiple rates, using atrous (also called
dilated) convolutions [30, 31, 32, 4, 33]. Moreover, an additional layer captures global context on an image-level so
as to maintain consistency in the labelling of distant pixels [6, 9]. By evaluating these diverse feature information
simultaneously, ASPP modules reﬁne the segmentation accuracy of multi-scaled objects.
3
Data
Datasets for semantic segmentation depend on the possibility to obtain pixel-wise labels. In our case, manual labelling
is impossible because the depicted wafers consist of 133,717 LED chips each, which must be classiﬁed chip-wise.
Therefore, we use the results of a comprehensive electrical and optical measurement, named wafer probing, which
takes place late in the manufacturing process when electrical contact pads are already added to the chip. However,
using measurement results as both, input and label images, may result in input-label mismatches, caused by different
measurement techniques. On the one hand, the brightness determined by photoluminescence measurement differs from
the brightness determined by wafer probing, where electronic excitation is induced rather than photo-excitation. And on
the other hand, wafer probing results cover a compilation of several electrical and optical tests, including evaluations
that take place before wafer probing, such as ultrasonic measurements. To align input and label images, we proceeded
as follows:
Input Images: Photoluminescence-measurement results are not saved as an image but as a list in a text ﬁle, where a
brightness value is reported for each LED chip over an 8 bit greyscale. In order to create a photoluminescence image, a
zero matrix of size 442 × 440 is ﬁlled with chip values, where applicable. To reach accordance with the wafer proberbased label images, the aforementioned ultrasonic-measurement results are embedded into the photoluminescence
images, in addition to functional structures, which are applied only after the measurement (see ﬁgure 2).
Label Images: As mentioned, wafer probing covers a sequence of tests and because the ﬁrst failure that occurs during
the probing sequence is assigned as defect cause, defect classes do not necessarily correspond with the core reason
for failure. Additionally, defect causes might have been assigned based on evaluations that took place before wafer
probing. Therefore, we subsumed all defect causes into one class (ﬁgure 2, yellow) and created two additional classes,
one representing in-spec chips (turquoise) and the other one representing background as well as functional structures
(dark blue), and yield 442 × 440 × 3 label images. Note that not all defects determined by wafer probing manifest in
salient brightness values and thus a small number of input-label mismatches remains.
3

===== Page 4 =====

Rethinking Fully Convolutional Networks for the Analysis of Photoluminescence Wafer Images PREPRINT
Figure 2: Photoluminescence input image of a wafer with 133,717 LED chips (a) and the corresponding wafer
probing-based label image (b), with yellow = defective chips, turquoise = in-spec chips and blue = functional structures/background. We classify defect structures by their appearance, namely single defects, cracks, voids and defect
clusters. Note that ﬁlm tears are visible on the photoluminescence image but not the label image, because they do not
correlate to defective LED chips. The photoluminescence image has been embedded with functional structures and
additional evaluation results, in order to align input and label images.
To train the network, we split our dataset of 136 images into 111 training and 25 validation images. Even though it is
generally agreed upon that the success of deep-learning methods can be attributed to large-scale labelled datasets [34],
in our case the number of training images is limited by the rare occurrence of wafers with salient and unique defect
structures in the manufacturing process. We therefore employ data augmentation by rotating the images 45°, 90° and
135°, respectively, and hereby quadruple the number of training samples. To test the developed network architecture,
we employ a test dataset of 366 photoluminescence images taken from the running production, where only samples
with distinctive differences between input image and label image as well as fractured wafers were discarded.
4
Network Architecture
Network architectures for industrial tasks are designed to be deployed in the manufacturing process, making as few as
possible pre-processing steps beneﬁcial. The developed network architecture, depicted in ﬁgure 3, therefore inputs
unnormalised photoluminescence images and the ﬁrst network layer applies a learned normalisation to the input image
[35]. Following batch normalisation, the now normalised image is forwarded to the ﬁrst dense convolutional pooling
block, which covers two convolutional layers with 32 kernels each (ﬁgure 3, green blocks) and a subsequent maxpooling
operation (red block). All convolutional layers in the downsampling path apply a composite function Hl to the incoming
feature maps, consisting of the three consecutive operations 3 × 3 convolution, batch normalisation and ReLU activation
function, where the input feature maps are zero-padded so as to keep their resolution stable. To implement dense
connections, the maxpooling operation inputs the concatenated feature maps of both preceding layers and reduces the
incoming tensor dimensions to 221 × 220 × 64 with a 2 × 2 kernel and a stride of 2, before forwarding them to the
subsequent block.
The horizontal grey lines added to the ﬁrst two blocks in ﬁgure 3 visualise the dense connections, where the number
of kernels per convolutional layer as well as the number of output feature maps of each block is written on top of the
corresponding block (marked with a sum sign). As an instance, the second block employs two convolutional layers
with 64 kernels each and the ﬁrst layer inputs the concatenated, maxpooled 64 feature maps of the previous block,
with xl = Hl([x0, ..., xl−1]), where xl are the feature maps of the current layer l, Hl is the aforementioned composite
function and [x0, ..., xl−1] denotes the concatenation of the previous feature maps. Subsequently, a maxpooling layer
downsamples and forwards all 192 feature maps to the third block. Because dense connections encourage the reuse of
feature maps, the number of kernels in each downsampling layer was reduced, as shown in table 1. This is especially
beneﬁcial for very large input images (which occur frequently in manufacturing) because it allows shallow networks
without loss of accuracy rather than processing a cropped and stitched image.
Altogether, the network’s encoder (or downsampling path) consists of four dense blocks, which repeatedly decrease
feature-map resolution while increasing the number of kernels. Even though the network’s receptive ﬁeld is widened
by this typical bi-pyramid design, all image objects are analysed with the same receptive ﬁeld, despite their multiple
sizes and shapes. Therefore, an ASPP module completes the downsampling path, which inputs the concatenated,
4

===== Page 5 =====

Rethinking Fully Convolutional Networks for the Analysis of Photoluminescence Wafer Images PREPRINT
Figure 3: Visualisation of the developed dense architecture with two ASPP modules, where the legend states the layer
operations and BN equals batch normalisation. The numbers on top of each dense block and layer, respectively, denote
the number of kernels per layer and the number of concatenated output feature maps per block (indicated by a sum
sign), if applicable. The horizontal grey lines in the ﬁrst two blocks illustrate the dense connections, exemplarily for all
downsampling blocks. ASPP modules are indicated by brackets, where each module layer processes the same input
simultaneously. Layers below the main branch indicate skip connections, which concatenate feature maps of shallow
and deep layers.
Table 1: Comparison of a basic network version with a typical number of kernels [2] and a densely connected version
with a reduced number of kernels in each layer. Note that the number of encoder feature maps increases in the dense
model because the bypassed and upsampled feature maps are concatenated rather than added.
basic model
dense model
conv1_x
64, 64
32, 32
conv2_x
128, 128
64, 64
conv3_x
256, 256, 256
64, 64, 64
conv4_x
512, 512, 512
128, 128, 128
conv5_x
512, 512, 64
128, 128, 128
up1
64
128
up2
64
128
up3
64
128
up4
3
3
un-pooled 768 feature maps of the fourth block and processes them in parallel. The module itself consists of four
dilated-convolution layers and one global-average-pooling layer, which extracts image-level features. Here, each
of the dilated-convolution layers samples the incoming feature maps with another dilation rate r, with zi′,j′,f ′ =
PH
i=1
PW
j=1 xi′+ir−1,j′+jr−1,fwijff ′, where zi′,j′,f ′ is a pixel in the output feature map f ′ and w is a H × W sized
ﬁlter that is slid across the sparsely sampled input feature map x. As shown in the following section, the best results
have been achieved with r = 1, 2, 6, and 12, where a dilation rate of 2 employed with a 3 × 3 kernel increases the
convolved area to 5 × 5 pixels, where only every other pixel is used. Incidentally, all dilated-convolution layers apply
the consecutive operations dilated convolution, batch normalisation and ReLU activation function. The ﬁfth module
5

===== Page 6 =====

Rethinking Fully Convolutional Networks for the Analysis of Photoluminescence Wafer Images PREPRINT
layer prevents fragmented segmentation results by incorporating image-level features. For this purpose, global average
pooling is applied, where the incoming 56 × 55 × 768 feature maps are downsampled to 1 × 1 × 768, that is one feature
per feature map is extracted. To retrieve the previous dimensions and decrease the number of feature maps to 128,
the consecutive operations 1 × 1 convolution, batch normalisation, bilinear upsampling and ReLU activation function
are applied. Finally, the module output and input are concatenated, resulting in 1408 feature maps altogether, and
forwarded to the ﬁrst upsampling layer.
As shown in ﬁgure 3, the decoder (or upsampling path) uses skip connections to reﬁne the network’s output by
combining the upsampled coarse semantic information with ﬁne-grain local information from shallow layers. For this
purpose, the ﬁrst upsampling layer inputs the aforementioned 1408 feature maps and outputs 64 upsampled feature
maps. Here, all upsampling layers apply the consecutive operations bilinear interpolation, 3 × 3 convolution and batch
normalisation. After upsampling, the resulting feature maps are concatenated with the bypassed feature maps of the skip
connection, whose number of feature maps has ﬁrst been reduced to 64 using 3 × 3 convolution and batch normalisation.
Finally, a ReLU activation function is applied to the concatenated 128 feature maps, which are then forwarded to the
second upsampling layer. Note that the upsampling layers are not actually densely connected but rather input dense
blocks via the skip connections, because the consistently increasing feature-map dimensions would otherwise require
unreasonable computational resources [13, 25].
The second upsampling layer consists of two parts, the aforementioned upsampling procedure as well as a second
ASPP module. Altogether, the module consists of three parallel layers, which all output 32 feature maps, namely
two dilated-convolution layers with r = 2 and 4 and a global-average-pooling layer. Then, the concatenated module
input and output is forwarded to the ﬁnal network block, which calculates the three output maps in two steps: ﬁrst,
the incoming feature maps are upsampled as before. Hereby, the network pre-processes the feature maps from the
preceding layer and restores the original dimensions of the input image. Then, the number of feature maps is reduced to
three and the normalised probability values of each output pixel are determined, using 1 × 1 convolution followed by a
softmax activation function. If the network output is used for classiﬁcation rather than network training, a subsequent
argmax function may be employed to determine the most probable class category for each image pixel. To train the
network for 80 epochs, we used a decaying learning rate of 5 · 10−4 as well as an L2-regularisation strength of 5 · 10−4
in combination with an RMSprop optimiser [36]. Furthermore, to equalise the unbalanced class categories, we added a
loss weight of 2,000 to defect-class losses and a weight of 100 on the remaining two classes. Additionally, we initialised
the ﬁrst four layers with pre-trained VGG 16 weights [22] via transfer learning [37], where we had to adjust the number
of kernels of the transferred parameters ﬁrst.
5
Experimental Evaluation
To evaluate the effect of the introduced architectural concepts—dense blocks and ASPP modules—ﬁve models are
compared: the basic model introduced in [2], a dense version of this model as well as three dense versions with
additional ASPP modules, namely one module in the downsampling path, one module in the upsampling path and one
model with both modules (denoted as dense ASPP²). Figure 4 (left) depicts the validation defect-class accuracy of four
architectures, where "1 module" refers to the version with an ASPP module in the downsampling path.
Analysing the performance of the basic version (red line) reveals substantial overﬁtting, which is also veriﬁed by ﬁgure
4, right plot, where the difference between training and validation defect-class accuracy is visualised as area over the
line for the basic version (red) and the dense version (grey). The comparison shows that introducing dense connections
while reducing the number of kernels per layer in the downsampling path (see table 1) diminishes overﬁtting and thus
increases defect-class accuracy as well as mean pixel accuracy, as listed in table 2.
Table 2: Validation and test mean pixel accuracy (MPA) and defect-class accuracy (DCA) of ﬁve different network
models, where the dense ASPP² model yields the highest overall performance. The test results reveal a drop in test
defect-class accuracy for all ﬁve models, where the dense ASPP² version shows the slightest difference in test and
validation performance.
MPA
test
DCA
test
basic model
94.3
94.1
86.6
83.5
dense model
95.6
95.7
90.6
88.7
1 module (encoder)
95.5
96.1
91.0
90.4
dense ASPP²
96.2
96.7
92.0
91.5
1 module (decoder)
95.4
95.8
91.2
88.5
6

===== Page 7 =====

Rethinking Fully Convolutional Networks for the Analysis of Photoluminescence Wafer Images PREPRINT
Figure 4: Left: Defect class accuracy of a basic encoder-decoder architecture (red) compared to the a dense version
(grey) as well as a dense model with one (blue) and two atrous-spatial-pyramid-pooling modules (dense ASPP², yellow).
The right panel visualises the varying divergence of validation (solid line) and training defect-class accuracy (area over
the line) of the basic and the dense models.
After implementing dense connections to the network architecture, we experimented with ASPP modules and noticed
that introducing an ASPP module into the network’s encoder increases defect-class accuracy only slightly, while
mean pixel accuracy remains roughly the same, as listed in table 2. However, adding an additional ASPP module
to the network’s decoder further increased defect-class accuracy to 92.0 % as well as mean pixel accuracy to 96.2 %.
Incidentally, adding a single ASPP module to the decoder yields comparable results as one module in the network’s
encoder, which indicates that for the given task probing incoming feature maps of a different size with multiple rates
at once extracts complementing information. This assumption is supported by the models’ test performances: while
test mean pixel accuracy remains relatively stable, test defect-class accuracy drops for all ﬁve models, but shows the
slightest difference for the dense ASPP² model. Thus, adding two ASPP modules to the network architecture optimises
the network’s ability to generalise to previously unseen defect structures and increases segmentation accuracy.
We can verify the dense ASPP² network’s increased segmentation accuracy by analysing prediction images of both
networks, the basic model and the dense ASPP² model, as shown in ﬁgure 5. Comparing the prediction images in
the ﬁrst row reveals that both architectures achieve comparable results for common defect structures, such as single
defective chips, cracks and voids and have also learned to distinguish salient brightness values correlating to defective
chips from those correlating to measurement artefacts, ﬁlm tears and functional structures. However, the second and
third row visualise the improved segmentation accuracy of the dense ASPP² model, where unique structures, namely
areas with dense single defective chips as well as large defect clusters, are segmented more precisely.
Finally, we examined the employed dilation rate in both single-module versions, the one in the encoder and the one in
the decoder, as listed in table 3. It becomes apparent that for the given task a moderate increase in the dilation rate yields
the highest performance, in contrast to [4], where a module with a large increase in the dilation rate, with r = 1, 6, 12,
18, achieved the best results. This result may be attributed to the different image objects of the used datasets, given that
the latter architecture was developed for everyday-scene images. Here, image objects range from a few pixels to objects
that cover almost the whole picture [38], whereas even large defect structures occupy only fractures of a wafer and thus
comparably small image areas. As a result, the differences in object size vary less distinctively on photoluminescence
images, which reﬂects in the optimal dilation rates of the ASPP modules.
6
Conclusion
In this paper, we have extended our previous network architecture for the pixel-ﬁne analysis of photoluminescence
wafer images with densely connected convolutional layers and two atrous-spatial-pyramid-pooling modules, one in the
encoder and one in the decoder structure. Hereby, challenges arising from very small datasets could be addressed: dense
7

===== Page 8 =====

Rethinking Fully Convolutional Networks for the Analysis of Photoluminescence Wafer Images PREPRINT
Figure 5: Comparison of prediction images of a basic network architecture and the dense ASPP² model, which exhibits
the improved segmentation accuracy of the latter network design.
Table 3: Validation defect-class accuracy of different dilation rates in the ASPP modules, incorporated in the encoder and
decoder structure, respectively. Note that for the second module a dilation rate of r = 1 is covered by the corresponding
upsampling layer.
encoder
decoder
dilation rate
DCA
dilation rate
DCA
1, 2, 4, 8
90.1
2, 1
89.5
1, 2, 6, 12
91.0
2, 4
91.2
1, 4, 8, 16
90.1
4, 8
88.4
1, 6, 12, 18
89.0
6, 12
89.4
blocks diminish overﬁtting and thus yield a higher defect-class accuracy, while ASPP modules reﬁne segmentation
accuracy by probing incoming feature maps at different scales at once. The resulting dense ASPP² model increases
test mean pixel accuracy from 94.1 % to 96.7 % and test defect-class accuracy from 83.5 % to 91.5 % and empirically
improved the segmentation of unique defect structures, compared to our previous version.
Acknowledgments
We would like to acknowledge support from the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF), as part
of the joint project InteGreat. Moreover, we would like to thank those who share their knowledge generously and in
particular the authors of NumPy groupies.
8

===== Page 9 =====

Rethinking Fully Convolutional Networks for the Analysis of Photoluminescence Wafer Images PREPRINT
References
[1] Jonathan Long, Evan Shelhamer, and Trevor Darrell. Fully convolutional networks for semantic segmentation.
CoRR, abs/1411.4038, 2014.
[2] Maike Lorena Stern and Martin Schellenberger. Fully convolutional networks for chip-wise defect detection
employing photoluminescence images. arXiv e-prints, abs/1910.02451, 2018.
[3] Gao Huang, Zhuang Liu, and Kilian Q. Weinberger.
Densely connected convolutional networks.
CoRR,
abs/1608.06993, 2016.
[4] Liang-Chieh Chen, George Papandreou, Florian Schroff, and Hartwig Adam. Rethinking atrous convolution for
semantic image segmentation. CoRR, abs/1706.05587, 2017.
[5] Chen-Yu Lee, Saining Xie, Patrick Gallagher, Zhengyou Zhang, and Zhuowen Tu. Deeply-Supervised Nets. arXiv
e-prints, page arXiv:1409.5185, Sep 2014.
[6] Wei Liu, Andrew Rabinovich, and Alexander C. Berg.
Parsenet: Looking wider to see better.
CoRR,
abs/1506.04579, 2015.
[7] Matthew D. Zeiler, Dilip Krishnan, Graham W. Taylor, and Rob Fergus. Deconvolutional networks. In 2010 IEEE
Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 2528–2535, 2010.
[8] Guosheng Lin, Anton Milan, Chunhua Shen, and Ian D. Reid. Reﬁnenet: Multi-path reﬁnement networks for
high-resolution semantic segmentation. CoRR, abs/1611.06612, 2016.
[9] Hengshuang Zhao, Jianping Shi, Xiaojuan Qi, Xiaogang Wang, and Jiaya Jia. Pyramid scene parsing network.
CoRR, abs/1612.01105, 2016.
[10] Lei Zhou, Xiangyong Kong, Chen Gong, Fan Zhang, and Xiaoguo Zhang. Fc-rccn: Fully convolutional residual
continuous crf network for semantic segmentation. Pattern Recognition Letters, 2018.
[11] Alex Kendall, Vijay Badrinarayanan, and Roberto Cipolla. Bayesian segnet: Model uncertainty in deep convolutional encoder-decoder architectures for scene understanding. CoRR, abs/1511.02680, 2015.
[12] Tobias Pohlen, Alexander Hermans, Markus Mathias, and Bastian Leibe. Full-resolution residual networks for
semantic segmentation in street scenes. CoRR, abs/1611.08323, 2016.
[13] Simon Jégou, Michal Drozdzal, David Vázquez, Adriana Romero, and Yoshua Bengio. The one hundred layers
tiramisu: Fully convolutional densenets for semantic segmentation. CoRR, abs/1611.09326, 2016.
[14] Liang-Chieh Chen, Yukun Zhu, George Papandreou, Florian Schroff, and Hartwig Adam. Encoder-decoder with
atrous separable convolution for semantic image segmentation. CoRR, abs/1802.02611, 2018.
[15] Mohammad Sabokrou, Mohsen Fayyaz, Mahmood Fathy, Zahra. Moayed, and Reinhard Klette. Deep-anomaly:
Fully convolutional neural network for fast anomaly detection in crowded scenes. Computer Vision and Image
Understanding, 172:88 – 97, 2018.
[16] Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image
segmentation. CoRR, abs/1505.04597, 2015.
[17] Lei Tai, Qiong Ye, and Ming Liu. Pca-aided fully convolutional networks for semantic segmentation of multichannel fmri. CoRR, abs/1610.01732, 2016.
[18] Phi Vu Tran.
A fully convolutional neural network for cardiac segmentation in short-axis MRI.
CoRR,
abs/1604.00494, 2016.
[19] Kanishka Sharma, Christian Rupprecht, Anna Caroli, Maria Carolina Aparicio, Andrea Remuzzi, Maximilian
Baust, and Nassir Navab. Automatic segmentation of kidneys using deep learning for total kidney volume
quantiﬁcation in autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease. Scientiﬁc Reports, 7(1):2049, 2017.
[20] Bin Guan, Jinkun Yao, Guoshan Zhang, and Xinbo Wang. Thigh fracture detection using deep learning method
based on new dilated convolutional feature pyramid network. Pattern Recognition Letters, 125:521 – 526, 2019.
[21] Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to document
recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 86(11):2278–2324, 1998.
[22] Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image recognition.
CoRR, abs/1409.1556, 2014.
[23] Christian Szegedy, Wei Liu, Yangqing Jia, Pierre Sermanet, Scott E. Reed, Dragomir Anguelov, Dumitru Erhan,
Vincent Vanhoucke, and Andrew Rabinovich. Going deeper with convolutions. CoRR, abs/1409.4842, 2014.
9

===== Page 10 =====

Rethinking Fully Convolutional Networks for the Analysis of Photoluminescence Wafer Images PREPRINT
[24] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. CoRR,
abs/1512.03385, 2015.
[25] Yi Zhu and Shawn D. Newsam. Densenet for dense ﬂow. CoRR, abs/1707.06316, 2017.
[26] Muhammad Arsalan, Rizwan Naqvi, Dong Kim, Phong Nguyen, Muhammad Owais, and Kang Park. Irisdensenet:
Robust iris segmentation using densely connected fully convolutional networks in the images by visible light and
near-infrared light camera sensors. Sensors, 18(5):1501, May 2018.
[27] Mahendra Khened, Varghese Alex Kollerathu, and Ganapathy Krishnamurthi. Fully convolutional multi-scale
residual densenets for cardiac segmentation and automated cardiac diagnosis using ensemble of classiﬁers. Medical
Image Analysis, 51:21 – 45, 2019.
[28] Svetlana Lazebnik, C. Schmid, and J. Ponce. Beyond bags of features: Spatial pyramid matching for recognizing
natural scene categories. In 2006 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR’06), volume 2, pages 2169–2178, 06 2006.
[29] Kristen Grauman and Trevor Darrell. The pyramid match kernel: Efﬁcient learning with sets of features. J. Mach.
Learn. Res., 8:725–760, May 2007.
[30] Matthias Holschneider, R. Kronland-Martinet, J. Morlet, and Ph. Tchamitchian. A real-time algorithm for signal
analysis with the help of the wavelet transform. In Jean-Michel Combes, Alexander Grossmann, and Philippe
Tchamitchian, editors, Wavelets, pages 286–297, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1990. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
[31] Pierre Sermanet, David Eigen, Xiang Zhang, Michaël Mathieu, Rob Fergus, and Yann LeCun. Overfeat: Integrated
recognition, localization and detection using convolutional networks. CoRR, abs/1312.6229, 2013.
[32] Fisher Yu and Vladlen Koltun. Multi-scale context aggregation by dilated convolutions. CoRR, abs/1511.07122,
2015.
[33] Ryuhei Hamaguchi, Aito Fujita, Keisuke Nemoto, Tomoyuki Imaizumi, and Shuhei Hikosaka. Effective use of
dilated convolutions for segmenting small object instances in remote sensing imagery. CoRR, abs/1709.00179,
2017.
[34] Chen Sun, Abhinav Shrivastava, Saurabh Singh, and Abhinav Gupta. Revisiting unreasonable effectiveness of
data in deep learning era. CoRR, abs/1707.02968, 2017.
[35] Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by reducing internal
covariate shift. CoRR, abs/1502.03167, 2015.
[36] Geoffrey Hinton, Nitish Srivastava, and Kevin Swersky. University of toronto, csc321: Neural networks for
machine learning - lecture notes. Published online, 2012. Retrieved 01.12.2018.
[37] Lisa Torrey and Jude Shavlik. Transfer learning. In Handbook of Research on Machine Learning Applications,
Hershey, PA, USA, 2009. IGI Global.
[38] Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge J. Belongie, Lubomir D. Bourdev, Ross B. Girshick, James Hays, Pietro
Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr Dollár, and C. Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft COCO: common objects in context.
CoRR, abs/1405.0312, 2014.
10
