

===== Page 1 =====

Prototyping Tools for CMOS Bioelectronic Sensors
Wafer-Level Prototyping Tools for CMOS Bioelectronic Sensors
Advait Madhavan,1, a) Ruohong Shi,1, 2, a) Alokik Kanwal,1 Glenn Holland,1 Jacob M. Majikes,1, 3
Paul N. Patrone,4 Anthony J. Kearsley,4 and Arvind Balijepalli1
1)Physical Measurement Laboratory, National Institute of Standards and Technology,
Gaithersburg, MD 20899
2)Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD
3)Theiss Research, LaJolla, CA
4)Information Technology Laboratory, National Institute of Standards and Technology,
Gaithersburg, MD 20899
(*Electronic mail: arvind.balijepalli@nist.gov)
Integrating biology with complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) sensors can enable highly parallel
measurements with minimal parasitic effects, significantly enhancing sensitivity. However, realizing this potential
often requires overcoming substantial barriers related to design, fabrication, and heterogeneous integration. In this
context, we present a comprehensive suite of tools and methods designed for wafer-scale biosensor prototyping that
is sensitive, highly parallelizable, and manufacturable.
A central component of our approach is a new initiative
that allows for open-source multi-project wafers (MPW), giving all participants access to the designs submitted by
others. We demonstrate that this strategy not only promotes design reuse but also facilitates advanced back-end-of-line
(BEOL) fabrication techniques, improving the manufacturability and process yield of CMOS biosensors. Developing
CMOS-based biosensors also involves the challenge of heterogeneous integration, which includes external electrical,
mechanical, and fluid layers. We demonstrate simple modular designs that enable such integration for sample delivery
and signal readout. Finally, we showcase the effectiveness of our approach in measuring the hybridization of DNA
molecules by focusing on data acquisition and machine learning (ML) methods that leverage the parallelism of the
sensors to enable robust classification of desirable analyte interactions.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Rapid
advances
in
both
biomolecular
technologies
and complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS)
manufacturing have not yet translated into a broad ecosystem
of commercial bioelectronic sensors that combine both
approaches.1–4 This is not an accident. Widespread adoption
is partly impeded by the complex requirements surrounding
the development of integrated CMOS biosensors, which
include access to robust prototype manufacturing, packaging,
and testing tools.
Smaller academic and commercial
groups must overcome significant economic, supply chain,
and technical challenges to access custom silicon devices
produced by semiconductor manufacturers.
Therefore,
sustained research into manufacturable practices can improve
the availability and use of electronic biosensors. Here, we
show one approach to utilizing wafer-scale processing within
a multi-facility multi-project wafer (MPW) framework to
address the above core challenges.
In the long-term effort to develop integrated CMOS
biosensors,
there
have
been
relatively
few
successful
examples. These products include next-generation sequencing
platforms that use millions of ion-sensitive field-effect
transistors
(ISFETs)
to
detect
small
changes
in
pH
upon base incorporation.5 Commercial DNA sequencing
now incorporates biological nanopores into individually
addressable arrays with electronic readout and applicationspecific integrated circuits (ASICs) for on-device processing
in a compact form factor.6 Additionally, there are ongoing
a)These authors contributed equally to this work.
efforts to develop CMOS chips that integrate photonics
with electronics in large arrays for commercial protein
sequencing.7 CMOS technology is also being developed
for multi-analyte and multiplexed sensing of biomarkers by
combining molecular and electronic components in a highly
parallel architecture.8
While impressive, the commercialization success stories
are few in comparison to demonstrations of novel sensors
and techniques by academic groups and small companies.9–18
Academic groups must invest considerable resources to
develop engineering capabilities and pay for mask sets
used in custom CMOS design.
Small companies, such as
startups, face the additional burden of shouldering expensive
licensing fees to access the electronic design automation
(EDA) tools required to realize their designs. Furthermore,
designing successful measurements and products often
requires multiple iterations of design, fabrication, and testing,
which cumulatively become cost-prohibitive.
The preferred approach to reducing the investment needed
to access custom CMOS designs is to participate in an
MPW run, which allows multiple organizations to pool
their resources to purchase a single mask set that contains
all of their designs.
The foundry fabricates wafers with
all the projects from the MPW, dices them into small
chips, each of which contains an individual design, and
returns them to the participants.
MPW runs have the
additional advantage of minimizing the sharing of intellectual
property between projects.
Such a siloed framework
is not well-suited for bioelectronics projects that require
considerable postprocessing to integrate critical fluidic and
organic elements.
The small form factor (≤1 cm per side) of chips returned
from an MPW run makes them difficult to handle and
arXiv:2509.24075v1  [physics.ins-det]  28 Sep 2025

===== Page 2 =====

Prototyping Tools for CMOS Bioelectronic Sensors
2
increases processing challenges, which results in lower yield.
To work around this limitation, the chips are mounted in
larger carrier substrates. This is typically accomplished by
adhering a handle wafer to the chip by using a photoresist19 or
placing the chip face-down in a petri dish with epoxy and then
curing the assembly.20 While such approaches ease packaging
challenges, the lack of precise alignment between the chip
and substrate handle requires them to be processed using lowthroughput techniques such as contact aligners or direct write
lithography, resulting in lower yields than achievable when
using high-throughput lithography tools.
Finally, in cases
where the handle wafers are too bulky or cumbersome to
integrate with board-level electronics, chips are directly wirebonded onto daughter boards with glob-top epoxy,21, or by
attaching plastic wells to create a fluidic reservoir.12
While the techniques discussed above allow fluidic
integration,
making electrical contact with the CMOS
circuitry poses additional challenges.
The chips must be
passivated to minimize ion contamination of the CMOS
layers, which prevents access to the top metal of the
design, thereby hindering electrical contact.22 Making robust
electrical connections is further complicated by the surface
roughness of the passivation layer and step height of the
insulating surface, which follows the topography of the
CMOS top metal layer. Finally, each individual integration
step can take significant time, with minimal component reuse
across projects. The net result is that there is a potential for
small errors at each step that cumulatively cause significant
delays and result in a low yield of functioning devices.
In this work, we aim to address several challenges by
utilizing the Nanotechnology Xccelerator, a pilot multifacility MPW program that employs open-source tools for
generating CMOS designs.
This initiative facilitates the
efficient use of wafer-level back-end-of-the-line (BEOL)
fabrication, enabling the development of prototypes that can
be manufactured effectively. The rest of the manuscript is
organized as follows. We first describe the Nanotechnology
Xcellerator (Sec. II) followed by an example CMOS design
that leverages this MPW program to design, fabricate,
and integrate the components needed to measure DNA
hybridization (Sec. III). Next, we detail the instrumentation,
data acquisition,
and analysis infrastructure needed to
efficiently acquire and process data for biological applications
(Sec. IV). Finally, we demonstrate measurements of DNA
hybridization using the system developed in this work
(Sec. V).
II.
NANOTECHNOLOGY XCCELERATOR:
MANUFACTURABLE CMOS PROTOTYPING
The Nanotechnology Xccelerator program, by design, has
several unique features designed to promote nanotechnology
research and prototyping that are amenable to developing
manufacturable bioelectronics.
The open-source nature of
this program requires participants to collectively develop
measurement test structures.
This requirement allows
groups to leverage design capabilities while lowering overall
costs.
Because all designs on the wafer are open-source,
each participant can receive either individual flash fields
(containing all projects) or entire wafers at a low cost to allow
optimum post-processing for their final application.
The fabrication process is stopped after the last set of
inter-layer vias are deposited and the surface planarized.
This planarized surface with a well-characterized topology
greatly simplifies BEOL processing.
Additionally, the
wafers received are not passivated, which allows a wide
range of surface chemistries to be developed for different
end applications.
Furthermore, the planar substrate makes
it straightforward to borrow integration strategies from
traditional CMOS packaging, such as redistribution layers
to fan out electrical contacts or integrate interposers to
simplify packaging. Finally, the ability to work at the wafer
level promotes the reuse of measurement instrumentation and
infrastructure for multiple applications across MPW runs to
enable affordable prototyping functions like a test vehicle that
provides a low-parasitic interface to novel technologies.
III.
WAFER-SCALE DNA BIOCHIP INTEGRATION
We offer a comprehensive guide to the design process,
fabrication, and integration process of a CMOS device
for measuring DNA hybridization using the wafer-level
Nanotechnology Xccelerator MPW. Although certain aspects,
such as the design of specific sensors, are single-use, we
emphasize the modularity and component reuse enabled by
working at the wafer scale throughout this section.
This
approach makes the tools developed here suitable for rapid
and iterative prototyping while promoting manufacturability.
We first describe the CMOS design of a 25-unit-cell
amplifier array to measure DNA hybridization and the results
from its experimental validation (Sec. III A).
This section
is followed by a description of the BEOL fabrication of a
redistribution layer to fan out the CMOS pads for easier
electrical connections (Sec. III B). Notably, this fabrication
step also provides a standardized interface that is available for
other projects on the MPW tape-out. Finally, we describe a
manufacturable integration approach that combines electrical
and fluidic connections to allow measurements for biological
applications (Sec. III C).
A.
CMOS Design and Validation
The CMOS circuitry used in this measurement is based
on a specific physical model (see Fig. 1A) of the biologicalelectrical interface,
which has been previously studied
using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS).14,23
The circuit topology is chosen in order to be compatible with
the experimental setup, which meaures the transfer function
of the interface as a function of frequency, through a lock-in
frequency sweep measurement. The circuit topology used is
shown in Fig. 1A, which shows a conceptual description of
each sensing location, consisting of an amplifier connected
to the working electrode (WE) and the reference electrode

===== Page 3 =====

Prototyping Tools for CMOS Bioelectronic Sensors
3
(RE). We modified each WE with ssDNA probes of a known
sequence. When an analyte with a complementary sequence
binds to the ssDNA probes, it changes the surface charge of
the WE. To measure this change, we overlaid a DC bias with
a small-amplitude AC voltage and applied it to the RE. The
WE is connected to the negative terminal of an operational
amplifier as shown in (Fig. 1A). Such a configuration operates
as a capacitive gain amplifier in the designed frequency range,
where the circuit’s gain depends only on the ratio of the WE’s
capacitance(CDNA) to the feedback capacitance (CF).
This
allows the circuit to convert changes in capacitance of the WE
surface into a variable gain, amplifying small-signal input for
frequency sweep measurements, enabling compatibility with
previously developed measurement infrastructure24.
The DNA-functionalized WE is described by a Randles
circuit23,25 that models the solution resistance (RSOL) in
series with the electroactive interface resistance (RDNA)
and capacitance (CDNA) that are in parallel as seen from
Fig. 1A. Our previous measurements that used a ≈1 mm
diameter circular electrode provide baseline values for these
circuit parameters (RDNA ≈1.5 MΩ, CDNA ≈38.7 nF, and
RSOL ≈918 Ω).23 In this design, the electrode sizes are
considerably smaller (≈10 µm per side) and can be varied
during the BEOL fabrication process to tune the measurement
sensitivity.
Assuming conventional area scaling for the
electrode impedance, we expect an increase in RDNA to ≥
10 GΩ, and a decrease in CDNA to ≤10 pF, comparable
to metal-insulator-metal (MIM) capacitors typically found in
CMOS processes.
In order to determine the frequency range at which
capacitive sensing can be performed, we first model the
transfer function of the circuit assuming an ideal amplifier.
The input impedance of the Randles circuit is given by
Zinp = Rsol +
RDNA
1+ jωRDNACDNA
,
(1)
where j is the imaginary unit, and ω corresponds to the
operating frequency. For jωRDNACDNA ≫1, which is satisfied
by ω > 10 rad/s this expression simplifies to,
Zinp = Rsol +
1
jωCDNA
.
(2)
The impedance of the feedback circuit is then found to be,
Zf =
R f
1+ jωRfCf
,
(3)
where R f and Cf are the resistance and capacitance of the
feedback path, respectively. For jωRfCf ≫1 this expression
simplifies to
Zf =
1
jωCf
.
(4)
Note that the operating frequency range does not always
satisfy the above condition, and hence, it sets the lowfrequency cut-off for the circuit behavior.
Assuming an ideal amplifier, we calculate the gain (G) by
using the expression,
G =−Zf
Zinp
(5)
=−CDNA
CF
(
1
1+ jωRsolCDNA
).
(6)
When jωRsolCDNA ≪1, which for RSOL ≈1 kΩand
CDNA ≈10 pF is satisfied for ω < 108 rad/s Eq. 6 simplifies
to,
G = −CDNA
CF
.
(7)
Hence, in an ideal system operated in the correct frequency
range with a constant feedback capacitor, the circuit gain is
directly proportional to the capacitance of the WE. In order
for the circuit to have a lower cutoff frequency (as described
in Eq 4) of f ≤10 kHz, RF = 2 MΩand CF = 10 pF were
chosen as parameters. Other parameters used in the design of
the circuit are RSOL = 1 kΩ, CDNA = 10 pF or 100 pF.
In practical circuits, however, the amplifier is not ideal and
must be designed under practical constraints such as gain,
bandwidth, and drive strength. Typical operation parameters
are variable gain from 5 to 50, based on input capacitance
(10 pF to 100 pF), an operational frequency range of 10 kHz
to 100 kHz, and an ability to drive a capacitive load of
90 pF (approximately equal to 3 feet of coaxial cable). In
order to meet these specifications, a two-stage amplifier was
designed in a 130 nm process, with a high-gain differential
input stage followed by a high-drive-strength push-pull output
stage as shown in Fig. 1B. Because such an amplifier is not
unconditionally stable, we added load compensation by using
a resistor (RC = 10 kΩ) and a capacitor (CC = 2 pF).
The panels in Fig. 2 show the theoretical and experimental
gain and phase plots for the circuit shown in Fig. 1A
with the above parameters for two input capacitance values,
10 pF and 100 pF.
The solid lines show the theoretical
circuit simulations, while the solid markers represent the
experimentally verified circuit behavior.
We observed
good agreement between the theory and the experiment for
frequencies below 100 kHz, after which the output signal
began to distort and failed to follow the simulated behavior.
From 100 Hz to 10 kHz, we found that the circuit behavior
followed the expected values defined by Eq. 4, for a frequency
range where jωR fCf ≤1.
This behavior flattens out at
fL = ωL/2π = 7.95 Hz, which sets the lower limit of the
valid frequency range in Eq. 6. The optimal operating range
of the circuit, where the gain is maximum, was between
10 kHz and 100 kHz. The realized bandwidth is adequate for
practical measurements using these sensors, as described in
the following sections. We employed a lock-in amplifier24 that
operates at a single frequency chosen from this range. This
setup is effective for measuring the changes in capacitance
that occur due to biomolecular binding.

===== Page 4 =====

Prototyping Tools for CMOS Bioelectronic Sensors
4
FIG. 1. Model of the biological interface to CMOS and amplifier design. (A) A simplified schematic of the biological-electrical interface and
embedded capacitive gain amplifier circuit. The feedback and compensation resistors and capacitors are implemented with high-resistance
polysilicon and metal-insulator-metal capacitors. (B) A detailed circuit schematic of the amplifier, showing the differential input stage, the
push-pull output stage, and the compensation resistor and capacitor.
B.
Back End of Line Fabrication
We utilized a BEOL process flow to create electrodes to
access the underlying CMOS circuitry while passivating the
chip from mobile ion contamination during measurements.
The biggest challenge with adding metal and passivation
layers to foundry-fabricated CMOS wafers is adhering to
a strict thermal budget.
The wafers cannot be exposed to
temperatures exceeding 450 ◦C without initiating a diffusion
of dopants that cause damage to the chips.26 Therefore, we
limited all processes to a maximum temperature of 300 ◦C.
We received 200 mm wafers from the foundry with vias
in place for the final metal layer (metal 4 in all chips
discussed here). The foundry stopped processing after this
step, returning planar wafers with a surface roughness of
≈1 nm and maximum step height of ≈10 nm.
This
attribute of the Nanotechnology Xcellerator MPW allows us
to use the same signal redistribution strategy in multiple
wafer projects, allowing for a common electrical interface and
greater reusability for different applications.
The process flow for the mid-process wafers is shown in
Fig. 3A.
(i) We first cored 100 mm diameter wafers from the 200 mm
substrates received from the foundry to facilitate easier
processing within our cleanroom.
(ii) We covered the vias with ≈100 nm thick titanium (Ti)
pads that were defined by using optical lithography and
a metal deposition and lift-off process. This step was
performed to protect the vias and also provide an etch
stop for future processing steps.
(iii) We followed this step by depositing ≈1 µm of
low-stress Silicon Nitride by using plasma-enhanced
chemical vapor deposition (PECVD). The PECVD
nitride served two purposes:
it provided electrical
passivation for the fanout pads described in subsequent
steps and also prevented mobile ion contamination
of the underlying CMOS layers from Potassium and
Sodium ions present in biological solutions. We then
lithographically patterned windows and etched back the
nitride films up to the Ti pads by using reactive ion
etching (RIE) with a CF4 chemistry.
(iv) The windows were then back-filled with ≈1.1 µm of
Ti by using an additional lithography step followed by
metal deposition and lift-off.
(v) Leads to fan out the peripheral pads around the CMOS
active area (Fig.
3B) were fabricated by using an
additional lithography step followed by the deposition
of ≈1 µm of Ti followed by lift-off. A critical feature
of our MPW that allows fan-out is the fact that the leads
can be routed on top of the other projects in the reticle,
resulting in a large handle area of ≈31 mm × 25 mm.
Furthermore, the nitride layers that were deposited in
the previous step electrically isolate the unused projects,
thereby minimizing failures.
(vi) Following the definition of the fan-out leads,
we
deposited ≈1 µm of Silicon Nitride by using PECVD
followed by the definition of windows and backfilling
with Ti using the process outlined in steps iii and iv.
(vii) Next, the contact pads, working electrodes, and dice
lines were patterned by using optical lithography,
followed by the deposition of ≈10 nm of Ti for an
adhesion layer and ≈100 nm of gold (Au), and liftoff. Finally, the reference electrodes were patterned by
using optical lithography, followed by the deposition of

===== Page 5 =====

Prototyping Tools for CMOS Bioelectronic Sensors
5
FIG. 2. Gain and phase plots of capacitive gain amplifier. The solid
lines show the theoretical circuit simulations, while the solid markers
represent the experimentally verified circuit behavior. (A) Response
of the amplifier when connected to a 10 pF input load. (B) Circuit
response when connected to a 100 pF input load.
≈10 nm of Ti for an adhesion layer and ≈100 nm of
platinum (Pt), and lift-off.
(viii) The finished wafers were then diced into chips for
assembly into the fluidic cell described in Sec. III C.
Since the lead times for CMOS fabrication can be
substantial, on the order of months, we designed and
fabricated test chips that lacked CMOS circuitry to develop
and validate packaging and integration strategies.
We
designed the test chips, shown in Fig. 4B, to have an identical
pad layout as the CMOS chips. To account for the lack of
circuitry, additional leads were added to route output signals
to the peripheral contact pads so they could be measured using
external instrumentation. The fabrication steps for these test
chips (Fig. 4A) were as follows:
FIG. 3. (A) Back end of line (BEOL) stack of CMOS chips. The
schematic is not to scale.
(B) The layout of fanout pads for the
CMOS chips is shown in the central region, where the active area
is located. The fanout interconnects extend over the other projects
in the reticle and terminate in large pads measuring ≈1 mm at the
periphery. The overall chip size is ≈31 mm×25 mm.
(i) First, ≈2.8 µm of thermal oxide was grown on the
100 mm wafers using a wet oxidation process. The leads
and contact pads were deposited via a lithography step,
followed by deposition of ≈100 nm Ti and then ≈90 nm
Pt.
(ii) Next, ≈200 nm of low-stress silicon nitride was
deposited using a PECVD process. The windows were
patterned lithographically for the reference electrodes
and then etched into the nitride layer by using an RIE
process.
(iii) Finally, the dice lines and windows for the peripheral
contact
pads
and
the
working
electrodes
were
lithographically patterned and then etched using an
RIE process.
Once etched, ≈100 nm of Ti and
≈100 nm of Au were deposited by using an e-beam
evaporation process,
followed by lift-off.
Metal

===== Page 6 =====

Prototyping Tools for CMOS Bioelectronic Sensors
6
FIG. 4. (A) Back end of line (BEOL) process stack for the test chips.
The schematic is not to scale. (B) Enlarged image of the working
and reference electrodes at the center of the test chips.
Fanout
interconnects from the working and reference electrodes are shown
in pink.
deposition was designed to ensure that the electrodes
rise up to or above the silicon nitride layer ≈200 nm.
The wafers were diced into individual chips as shown in
Fig. 4B.
C.
Packaging Design and Integration
The ability to prototype at the wafer scale and to use
BEOL techniques to redistribute contact pads, as described
in Sec. III B, eases packaging challenges and can allow
solutions that are (i) modular to allow components such as
fluidics inserts to be rapidly exchanged, (ii) manufacturable
because they use standard industrial processes such as CNC
machining and 3D printing, and (iii) flexible to provide
standard interfaces that allow the package to be configured
for chips built for different applications.
Our packaging solution, which strives to achieve the above
attributes, is shown in Fig. 5.
The package comprises
FIG. 5. (A) CAD model of the package that integrates mechanical,
fluidic, and electrical components.
Channel guides and stops
ensure positive registration of the chip, while the upper mechanical
component supports the electrical interface and interchangeable
fluidic inserts. (B) A photograph of the assembled fluidic package.
The printed circuit board (PCB) implements the electrical interface
and also validates chip registration and alignment through the use
of three light-emitting diodes (LEDs) that illuminate when the pogo
pins contact the chip pads.
two primary structural elements, the base support that
houses and aligns the chip, and the electrical and fluidics
interface that provides structural support for electrical and
fluid connections. In the example shown in the figure, the
base support was CNC machined while the electrical fluidics
interface was 3D-printed with a biocompatible resin, although
it is also possible to fabricate these components using CNC
machining for enhanced mechanical durability or chemical
resistance. Both components are discussed in detail next.
Base Support: This element simplifies the alignment of
the chip to ensure reproducible contact with the electrical
and fluidics interface.
Guides constrain the chip and help
alignment at the stop (dashed white lines) at the top right

===== Page 7 =====

Prototyping Tools for CMOS Bioelectronic Sensors
7
corner of the base support as seen in Fig. 5A. The thin
channels to the left allow the chip to be pushed against the
guide to ensure positive registration and alignment. When
measurements are complete, we ejected the chip by using a
pin guided by a channel on the back of the base support.
The movement of the electrical and fluidics interface when
lowered to make electrical contact with the chip is constrained
by four alignment posts integrated into the base support.
Finally, the base support houses small spring-loaded bolts that
are compressed by thumb screws that control the engagement
of the pogo pins with contact pads on the chip.
Fig. 5B shows a version of the base support used in
this study that was 3D-printed using the thermoplastic
Polyoxymethylene.
We designed the parts to be easily
adapted for injection molding for low-cost, high-volume
applications or to allow tighter mechanical tolerance using
CNC machining.
Electrical and Fluidics Interface:
The electrical and
fluidics interface (Fig. 5A) supports the critical functions of
making electrical contact with the chip to apply control signals
or read data and delivering fluids via a customizable insert.
The redistribution layer described in Sec. III B simplifies the
electrical interface by allowing contact pads that are ≈1 mm
on an edge with an inter-pad pitch of ≈1.7 mm. The large
pad size makes the design tolerant to angular alignment errors
of up to ≈±1◦. Our pad layout also permits using springloaded pogo pins (Fig. 5) to create electrical connections. The
electrical and fluidic interface body contains double-ended
pogo pins in pockets sandwiched between the printed circuit
board (PCB) and the chip. This design eliminates the need for
wire bonding and soldering, allowing for rapid chip exchange.
We verified the proper insertion of the CMOS chip and its
electrical contact with the electrical and fluidics interface by
designing a loopback interface comprised of pairs of pads on
three corners of the chip as seen from the magnified region
(top right) of the CMOS chip in Fig.5A. We connected one
pad in the pair to the common ground of the circuit. The
second pad was connected to a light-emitting diode (LED),
which was powered by a 5 V power supply via a currentlimiting resistor. When both pogo pins make positive contact
with their corresponding pads, the LED illuminates as seen in
Fig. 5B. The illumination of all three LEDs indicates positive
registration against the chip guides, the chip is oriented
properly, and there are no angular misalignments beyond the
design tolerance.
In addition to electrical connections, we developed modular
fluidics inserts to facilitate sample delivery, as seen in Fig. 5.
The fluidic inserts can be threaded from the top of the
electrical and fluidics interface.
In the current study, an
open well insert with a volume of ≈160 µL was used
to allow rapid fluid exchange using standard laboratory
pipettes.
Importantly, this insert can be customized for
specific applications, for example, by replacing the open well
insert with one that incorporates microfluidic channels that
allow rapid fluid exchange.
FIG. 6. Schematic of the hardware setup for multiplexed sensing.
The on-board multiplexers are controlled by using a digital IO (DIO)
interface. The measurements are initiated by using a trigger signal
from the lock-in amplifier, which starts the voltage scan using the
arbitrary waveform generator (AWG) and also arms the measurement
for each sensor as described in the main text.
IV.
INSTRUMENTATION
A.
Instrumentation Layout and Signal Timing
We performed the measurements by using a two-electrode
electrochemical cell with a single global RE and 25
independently addressed WEs.
Instead of individual REs
paired to each WE as designed, we employed a global
Ag/AgCl quasi-reference electrode in this study.
We then
sequentially connected each WE in the array to a lock-in
amplifier (LIA) via a 25:1 multiplexer (MUX) as illustrated in
Fig. 6. The measurements were initiated with the transmission
of a global measurement trigger (indicated in green).
At
the same time, we connected the first sensor to the LIA by
using the digital I/O (DIO) interface through the MUX. After
completing the measurements with the connected electrode,
we sequentially connected the subsequent sensors to the LIA
according to a scan list.
The global measurement trigger also initiated a voltage
scan, Vscan, controlled by the arbitrary waveform generator
(AWG) and summed with the LIA reference AC signal.
The switch pulse is then overlaid on top of Vscan.
While
we demonstrate this ability with a triangle wave, it is
straightforward to adapt this approach for other waveforms,
such as a square wave or even a constant DC voltage.
This technique allows us to supply arbitrary waveforms to
interrogate the samples that can be tailored to particular
applications. Multiple scans of the array allow us to robustly
sample Vscan each sensor, measuring a slightly different region
of the waveform. By saving both the measured signal and the
corresponding segment of Vscan, we can accurately reconstruct
the signal-voltage response for the entire array.
Finally,
because the phase relationship between the scan pulse and
Vscan is well-defined and adjustable, we are able to repeat
the measurements with a different starting phase for Vscan
to improve coverage of the desired waveform and tune the

===== Page 8 =====

Prototyping Tools for CMOS Bioelectronic Sensors
8
granularity of the signal-voltage data.
B.
Data Acquisition
We used purpose-built Python scripts27 run on a PC
(Fig. 6, gray lines) to handle instrument configuration and
data handling. The scripts abstracted communications with
the instrumentation either over the universal serial bus (USB)
or the general-purpose interface bus (GPIB) for seamless
operations. The configuration included initializing the MUX
with the scan list that enumerated the connection order of
the measurement. We configured AWG with the waveform
for Vscan that was summed with the lock-in reference signal.
We initiated the measurements by programming the LIA
to emit the measurement trigger signal as seen in Fig. 6.
Measurements of each connected WE were saved separately
to disk to simplify data analysis as described in the next
section.
V.
DNA MEASUREMENTS
DNA
Sequences
and
Preparation:
The
ssDNA
anchor
sequence
used
was
/5ThioMC6-D/
TAGTCGTAAGCTGATATGGCTGATTAGTCGGAAGCATCGAACGCTGAT,
and
the
analyte
sequence
was
ATCAGCGTTCGATGCTTCCGACTAATCAGCCATATCAGCTTACGACTA.
The
control
strand
sequence
was
TTTATACAGGAGCAATCATAAGGG
CATTAGACCCAGCCC. We purchased both DNA sequences
in 100 µmol/L (µM) in 1 x TE buffer containing 10 mmol/L
(mM) Tris and 100 µmol/L (µM) Ethylenediaminetetraacetic
acid (EDTA). 1x TAE buffer comprising ≈40 mmol/L (mM)
Tris base, ≈20 mmol/L (mM) acetic acid, ≈1 mmol/L (mM)
EDTA, was diluted from commercially available 50x TAE
buffer with deionized water.
To prepare the ssDNA anchor, 10 µL of 400 nmol/L
(nM)
ssDNA
was
reduced
with
30
µL
of
tris(2carboxyethyl)phosphine
(TCEP)
as
the
reducing
agent
for 2 hours.
Similarly, 10 µL of 6-mercapto-1-hexanol
(MCH) was reduced with 30 µL of TCEP for 2 hours.
Following reduction, the mixtures were centrifuged at 1000
relative centrifugal force (RCF), and the supernatant solution
was collected for subsequent experiments.
Electrode
Functionalization
and
Electrical
Measurements:
The chips with an array of 25 gold
electrodes were prepared for measurements by first cleaning
and modifying them with thiol chemistry. After the chamber
was pre-cleaned for 30 minutes, the chips were cleaned for
30 minutes in a UV Ozone cleaner. The cleaned electrodes
were immediately immersed in 50 mmol/L(mM) sulfuric
acid solution, and each electrode was chemically cleaned
by scanning the applied potential from −0.25 V to +1.5 V
relative to an Ag/AgCl reference electrode for at least 10
cycles at a sweep rate of 0.5 V/s.
The chips were then rinsed five times with DIW and
immediately immersed in a solution of ≈10 µmol/L (µM)
FIG. 7. Representative data from a single sensor. (A) Capacitance
response for baseline single-stranded DNA (blue) and hybridized
double-stranded DNA (pink). The measurements were performed
under an applied AC field with amplitude VAC,pk = 50 mV and
frequency of 500 Hz. (B) The capacitance of the single-stranded
DNA (blue) and double-stranded DNA (pink) was estimated by
averaging the steady-state signal across the shaded region shown in
panel A, which represents ≈50 % of the dwell time. The error bars
represent one standard deviation.
of the ssDNA anchor in TAEM buffer for ≈1 hour at room
temperature. This functionalization with an ssDNA anchor
strand was followed by a second incubation step to passivate
the unreacted gold electrode surface by immersing the chips

===== Page 9 =====

Prototyping Tools for CMOS Bioelectronic Sensors
9
FIG. 8. DNA chip measurement schematic. The square-shaped gold
sheet represents one of the 25 ( approx10 µm per side) gold electrode
arrays. DNA anchors (magenta) are attached to the surface using
thiol chemistry. The analyte (yellow) was added to bind the DNA
anchors through complementary sequence hybridization.
in a solution comprised of ≈1 mmol/L (mM) of MCH in
ethanol for ≈16 hours. Finally, the chips were thoroughly
washed with running buffer solution (RBS) at least five
times before being used for electronic measurements.
For
these measurements, RBS was prepared with 1x TAE buffer
containing 50 mmol/L (mM) NaCl, 12.5 mmol/L (mM)
MgCl2, 200 µmol/L (µM) K4Fe(CN)6, and 200 µmol/L
(µM) K3Fe(CN)6.
All electronic measurements were performed by using a
two-electrode electrochemical cell with a ≈160 µL sample
volume.
Capacitance measurements were performed at a
fixed frequency of 500 Hz with an applied AC voltage with
amplitude, ≈50 mVPP and a constant DC offset of ≈0 V
relative to an Ag/AgCl reference electrode and analyzed as
shown in Fig. 7.
DNA Hybridization: Baseline measurements of the gold
electrodes with ssDNA anchor and MCH were performed
under RBS. Strong chemical interactions exist between the
DNA bases and the gold surface due to π-metal and van
der Waals forces. These interactions can cause immobilized
single-stranded DNA to adsorb nonspecifically onto the gold
electrode, hindering hybridization and signal generation. To
mitigate this behavior, we washed the cell five times with RBS
after first incubating it with the DNA analyte strand that was
dissovled in RBS at a concentration of 1 mmol/L (mM) for 60
minutes. We then measured the DNA hybridization two hours
after the rinse step to allow the DNA to adopt a more upright
conformation, improving measurement reproducibility.
VI.
DNA HYBRIDIZATION RESULTS
We measured the interfacial capacitance of gold electrodes
functionalized with single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) anchors in
the presence of an applied electric field to detect the specific
hybridization of DNA sequences that have a complementary
sequence to the probe strands attached to the electrode
surface, as shown in Fig. 8. When an electric field is applied,
it attracts counter-ions from the bulk solution to the surface,
resulting in the formation of an electrical double layer.
This double layer behaves like a nanoscale capacitor and is
influenced by the ssDNA, yielding the baseline measurements
shown in Fig. 7.
The binding of complementary DNA strands (analytes)
to the anchored ssDNA alters the structure of this double
layer, resulting in a change in interfacial capacitance from the
baseline values, also demonstrated in Fig. 7. The increase
in the capacitance, relative to the baseline value, can be
understood from the change in conformation adopted by
DNA upon hybridization.
Surface-bound ssDNA strands
typically lie flat against the gold surface, obstructing parts
of the electrode from interacting directly with the electrolyte.
However, upon hybridization, the double-stranded DNA
adopts a more rigid and upright orientation,
exposing
additional electrode surface area that was previously hidden
by the surface-adsorbed ssDNA and resulting in an overall
higher capacitance.
Capacitance measurements, at a constant potential 0.0 V
relative to an Ag/AgCl reference electrode, shown in Fig. 9,
were recorded for both the baseline ssDNA case and after
the addition of the analyte with a complementary sequence.
We measured a total of ten chips, each with 25 electrodes.
Following the addition of the analyte, we observed an
increase in the capacitance, indicating successful detection
of hybridization between the analyte strand and the ssDNA
anchor (Fig. 9 B). Across ten chips, n = 250 electrodes in
total, DNA hybridization resulted in an average capacitance
change of (24.5 ± 3.9) pF or a relative change of (7.8 ±
0.9) % (k = 2,≈95 % confidence) upon hybridization.
To
verify
the
specificity
of
the
sensors,
a
noncomplementary
DNA
strand
was
used
as
a
negative
control
and
incubated
under
the
same
conditions
as
the
complementary
analyte
strands.
The
probability
of
hybridization
with
the
non-complementary
strand
was estimated using NUPACK simulations, which were
conducted at a temperature of 25°C and a concentration of
10 nmol/L(nM), allowing for the formation of complexes
with up to four strands. Under these conditions, NUPACK
predicted a binding probability of less than 1 % for the
non-complementary control strand interacting with the
ssDNA anchor.
For these control electrodes (n = 75),
the average change in capacitance after incubating with
the non-complementary sequence was measured to be
(−5.5 ± 4.8) pF or a relative change of (−1.3 ± 0.9) %
(k = 2,≈95 % confidence). This result confirms that nonspecific binding did not produce a significant change in the
measured capacitance.
To assess the performance of the biosensors in accurately
detecting the analyte, we performed a homotopy-classification
analysis28–30 as shown in Fig. 9B. The central idea of
this analysis is to first assume that “positive” sensors (i.e.,
those exposed to analyte) yield measurements x according
to some distribution P(x), whereas control sensors yield
measurements x with a different distribution N(x).
In this
work, x is taken to be a two-dimensional vector x = (x1,x2)

===== Page 10 =====

Prototyping Tools for CMOS Bioelectronic Sensors
10
FIG. 9. A. Representative capacitance measurements from all 25 electrodes on a single chip under baseline conditions (ssDNA) and after
hybridization with an analyte with a complementary sequence (dsDNA). B. Classification analysis characterizing the performance of ten
chips comprised of 25 electrodes each. Blue diamonds are measurements from individual sensors exposed to the analyte, whereas red
circles are control sensors that were not exposed to the analyte. The colored surface and contours quantify the relative likelihood R(x)
that a sensor with a given measurement value x is being bound by the analyte. From bottom to top, the contours correspond to values
R(x) = 0.11,0.25,0.43,0.67,1.0,1.5,2.3,4.0,9.0. C. Heatmaps showing the spatial distribution of relative capacitance changes across ten
measured chips, with electrode positions corresponding to their actual physical locations.
with components,
x1 = Ci
(8)
x2 = Cf −Ci
Ci
,
(9)
where Ci is the initial capacitance, and Cf is the capacitance
after exposure to the analyte or control sample.
We then
construct a family of classification boundaries that correspond
to different values of the relative likelihood R(x) = N(x)/P(x).
Physically, we can interpret R(x) as quantifying the extent to
which a positive sensor would generate a measurement x as
compared to a negative sensor.
To quantify the probability Pr[+|r] that a given sensor
detects an analyte, it is necessary to first estimate the
prevalence q (or fraction) of positive sensors. This task, which
has been addressed in a number of fields, has a rich history that
is beyond the scope of the current manuscript (see Ref. 30 and
the references therein for more details). Here we note that
given q, the probability Pr[+|r] is given by
Pr[+|r] =
q
q+(1−q)R(x).
(10)
Absent a reasonable estimate of q, the R(x) = 1 boundary
(bold contour in Fig. 9B) can also be used as a classifier for
determining when a sensor is positive. For the data presented
here, the characteristic accuracy of this classifier is at least
95 % for any value of prevalence.
The visualization of the electrode arrays as 5×5 heatmaps,
shown in Fig.
9C, facilitates a quick assessment of both
inter-chip and intra-chip variation.
The figure reveals that
nine out of the ten measured chips exhibited consistent
performance, predominantly showing positive capacitance
changes, with relatively few electrodes displaying negative
values.
Only one chip demonstrated behavior in which
a significant portion of the electrodes had either negative

===== Page 11 =====

Prototyping Tools for CMOS Bioelectronic Sensors
11
or near-zero capacitance changes following incubation with
the analyte.
This anomaly may be attributed to localized
surface contamination, fabrication defects, or handling errors
specific to that chip.
When excluding this outlier, 95 %
of the electrodes on the remaining chips showed a relative
capacitance change ranging from 2 % to 21 %.
VII.
CONCLUSIONS
We present a manufacturable method for creating CMOS
sensors suitable for healthcare by addressing key research
areas that currently hinder innovation.
A significant
advancement supporting our approach is the Nanotechnology
Xcellerator program, an open-source MPW initiative that
enables all participants to reuse designs while promoting
research in BEOL fabrication techniques to yield innovative
devices. The program’s flexibility and the ability to prototype
using full wafers are distinguishing features that significantly
enhance the manufacturability and yield of biosensors.
Moreover, these advantages are achieved while benefiting
from the cost-effectiveness associated with participating in
MPW tapeouts.
The ability to work with larger silicon substrates alleviates
packaging constraints.
The larger substrates allowed us
to utilize standard packaging strategies, such as fan-out
techniques,
to ensure repeatable electrical connections,
thereby further improving yield. Our approach also facilitated
the modular integration of mechanical, electrical, and fluidic
components, resulting in a comprehensive packaging solution.
Additionally, our packaging was developed using either 3Dprinted or machined parts to ensure manufacturability.
Finally, we leveraged the advances in device processing
and packaging to demonstrate a biosensor array that was
used to measure the hybridization of DNA strands with a
complementary sequence. We demonstrated the performance
of the sensors by using data from ten individual chips (a total
of 250 sensors) and three control chips (with 75 sensors)
that were incubated with a non-complementary sequence.
The data allowed us to perform homotopy classification,
which allowed us to quantify the likelihood of the sensors
accurately detecting the analyte. This analysis showed that
the characteristic accuracy of identifying the analyte was at
least 95 %.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was performed, in part, at the NIST Center for
Nanoscale Science and Technology, nanofabrication facility.
REFERENCES
1G. Liu, Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology 9 (2021).
2OSTP, “Revitalizing the U.S. Semiconductor Ecosystem,” Tech. Rep.
(OSTP, 2022).
3Semiconductor Research Corporation, “2018 Semiconductor Synthetic
Biology Roadmap,” Tech. Rep. (2018).
4S. Forouhi, R. Dehghani, and E. Ghafar-Zadeh, Sensors and Actuators A:
Physical 297, 111531 (2019).
5J. M. Rothberg, W. Hinz, T. M. Rearick, J. Schultz, W. Mileski, M. Davey,
J. H. Leamon, K. Johnson, M. J. Milgrew, M. Edwards, J. Hoon, J. F.
Simons, D. Marran, J. W. Myers, J. F. Davidson, A. Branting, J. R.
Nobile, B. P. Puc, D. Light, T. A. Clark, M. Huber, J. T. Branciforte, I. B.
Stoner, S. E. Cawley, M. Lyons, Y. Fu, N. Homer, M. Sedova, X. Miao,
B. Reed, J. Sabina, E. Feierstein, M. Schorn, M. Alanjary, E. Dimalanta,
D. Dressman, R. Kasinskas, T. Sokolsky, J. A. Fidanza, E. Namsaraev,
K. J. McKernan, A. Williams, G. T. Roth, and J. Bustillo, Nature 475,
348 (2011).
6M. Jain, H. E. Olsen, B. Paten, and M. Akeson, Genome Biology 17, 239
(2016).
7B. D. Reed, M. J. Meyer, V. Abramzon, O. Ad, O. Ad, P. Adcock, F. R.
Ahmad, G. Alppay, J. A. Ball, J. Beach, D. Belhachemi, A. Bellofiore,
M. Bellos, J. F. Beltrán, A. Betts, M. W. Bhuiya, K. Blacklock, R. Boer,
D. Boisvert, N. D. Brault, A. Buxbaum, S. Caprio, C. Choi, T. D. Christian,
R. Clancy, J. Clark, T. Connolly, K. F. Croce, R. Cullen, M. Davey,
J. Davidson, M. M. Elshenawy, M. Ferrigno, D. Frier, S. Gudipati,
S. Hamill, Z. He, S. Hosali, H. Huang, L. Huang, A. Kabiri, G. Kriger,
B. Lathrop, A. Li, P. Lim, S. Liu, F. Luo, C. Lv, X. Ma, E. McCormack,
M. Millham, R. Nani, M. Pandey, J. Parillo, G. Patel, D. H. Pike,
K. Preston, A. Pichard-Kostuch, K. Rearick, T. Rearick, M. RibezziCrivellari, G. Schmid, J. Schultz, X. Shi, B. Singh, N. Srivastava, S. F.
Stewman, T. Thurston, T. R. Thurston, P. Trioli, J. Tullman, X. Wang, Y.-C.
Wang, E. A. G. Webster, Z. Zhang, J. Zuniga, S. S. Patel, A. D. Griffiths,
A. M. van Oijen, M. McKenna, M. D. Dyer, and J. M. Rothberg, Science
378, 186 (2022), publisher: American Association for the Advancement of
Science.
8C. W. Fuller, P. S. Padayatti, H. Abderrahim, L. Adamiak, N. Alagar,
N. Ananthapadmanabhan, J. Baek, S. Chinni, C. Choi, K. J. Delaney,
R. Dubielzig, J. Frkanec, C. Garcia, C. Gardner, D. Gebhardt, T. Geiser,
Z. Gutierrez, D. A. Hall, A. P. Hodges, G. Hou, S. Jain, T. Jones,
R. Lobaton, Z. Majzik, A. Marte, P. Mohan, P. Mola, P. Mudondo,
J. Mullinix, T. Nguyen, F. Ollinger, S. Orr, Y. Ouyang, P. Pan, N. Park,
D. Porras, K. Prabhu, C. Reese, T. Ruel, T. Sauerbrey, J. R. Sawyer,
P. Sinha, J. Tu, A. G. Venkatesh, S. VijayKumar, L. Zheng, S. Jin, J. M.
Tour, G. M. Church, P. W. Mola,
and B. Merriman, Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 119 (2022), 10.1073/pnas.2112812119,
publisher: National Academy of Sciences Section: Biological Sciences.
9K. Hu, J. Ho,
and J. K. Rosenstein, IEEE Transactions on Biomedical
Circuits and Systems , 1 (2022), conference Name: IEEE Transactions on
Biomedical Circuits and Systems.
10B. Senevirathna, A. Castro, M. Dandin, E. Smela, and P. Abshire, in 2016
IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS) (2016) pp.
2863–2866, iSSN: 2379-447X.
11T. Datta-Chaudhuri, R. C. Araneda, P. Abshire, and E. Smela, Sensors and
Actuators B: Chemical 235, 74 (2016).
12J. Zeng, L. Kuang, M. Cacho-Soblechero,
and P. Georgiou, IEEE
Transactions on Biomedical Circuits and Systems 15, 820 (2021),
conference Name: IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Circuits and Systems.
13S. T. Le, N. B. Guros, R. C. Bruce, A. Cardone, N. D. Amin, S. Zhang, J. B.
Klauda, H. C. Pant, C. A. Richter, and A. Balijepalli, Nanoscale 11, 15622
(2019).
14S. Cho, A. Zaslavsky, C. A. Richter, J. M. Majikes, J. A. Liddle, F. Andrieu,
S. Barraud,
and A. Balijepalli, in 2022 International Electron Devices
Meeting (IEDM) (2022) pp. 24.2.1–24.2.4, iSSN: 2156-017X.
15C.-Y. Lin and M. Dandin, .
16M. S. R. Sajal, K.-C. Lin, Y. Gilpin, V. Walawalkar, F. Dehghandehnavi,
R. E. Taylor,
and M. Dandin, in 2023 International Electron Devices
Meeting (IEDM) (2023) pp. 1–4, iSSN: 2156-017X.
17A. Nizam and N. McFarlane, in 2024 IEEE International Instrumentation
and Measurement Technology Conference (I2MTC) (2024) pp. 1–6, iSSN:
2642-2077.
18D. A. Hall, R. S. Gaster, K. A. A. Makinwa, S. X. Wang, and B. Murmann,
IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits 48, 1290 (2013).
19Y. Liu, E. Smela, N. Nelson,
and P. Abshire, in The 26th Annual
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology

===== Page 12 =====

Prototyping Tools for CMOS Bioelectronic Sensors
12
Society, Vol. 1 (2004) pp. 2534–2537.
20T. Datta-Chaudhuri, P. Abshire, and E. Smela, Lab on a Chip 14, 1753
(2014), publisher: The Royal Society of Chemistry.
21Y. Gilpin, C.-Y. Lin, M. Forssell, S. Zheng, P. Grover, and M. Dandin,
in 2022 29th IEEE International Conference on Electronics, Circuits and
Systems (ICECS) (2022) pp. 1–4.
22T. Delbruck, I. A. M. Elfadel, S. Muzaffar, G. Haessig, B. Wang,
A. Bermak, R. Graca, L. Camu´nas-Mesa, B. Senevirathna, P. Abshire,
B. Linares-Barranco, S. Afshar, S.-C. Liu, R. M. Wang, P. Dudek, S. Carey,
J. de la Rosa, M. Dandin, S. Lu, V. Frick, T. Serrano-Gotarredona, P. Lopez,
M. Payvand, A. Madhavan, E. Fossum, J. C. V. Tieck, I. Williams,
Y. Liu, T. Constandinou, A. Serb, R. Carmona-Galan, R. Nawrocki, and
W. D. Leon-Salas, in 2020 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and
Systems (ISCAS) (2020) pp. 1–18, iSSN: 2158-1525.
23J. M. Majikes, S. Cho, T. E. Cleveland, J. A. Liddle, and A. Balijepalli,
Nanoscale 16, 20893 (2024), publisher: The Royal Society of Chemistry.
24S. T. Le, S. Cho, C. A. Richter, and A. Balijepalli, Review of Scientific
Instruments 92, 030901 (2021), publisher: American Institute of Physics.
25Bard,
Allen J. and Faulkner,
Larry R., Electrochemical Methods:
Fundamentals and Applications, 2nd ed. (Wiley, 2000).
26H. Takeuchi, A. Wung, X. Sun, R. Howe,
and T.-J. King, IEEE
Transactions on Electron Devices 52, 2081 (2005).
27National Institute of Standards and Technology, “pyLabAuto,” (2024).
28P. N. Patrone, R. A. Binder, C. S. Forconi, A. M. Moormann,
and
A. J. Kearsley, “Analysis of Diagnostics (Part I): Prevalence, Uncertainty
Quantification, and Machine Learning,” (2024), arXiv:2309.00645 [stat].
29P. N. Patrone and A. J. Kearsley, “Inequalities for Optimization of
Classification Algorithms:
A Perspective Motivated by Diagnostic
Testing,” (2025), arXiv:2508.01065 [stat].
30P. Patrone and A. Kearsley, “Probabilistic Consistency in Machine
Learning and Its Connection to Uncertainty Quantification,”
(2025),
arXiv:2507.21670 [cs].
