

===== Page 1 =====

Coherent Fourier Scatterometry for detection of
killer defects on silicon carbide samples
Jila Rafighdoost, Dmytro Kolenov, and Silvania F. Pereira
Optics Research Group, Imaging Physics Department, Faculty of
Applied Sciences, Delft University of Technology, Lorentzweg 1,
2628 CJ Delft, The Netherlands
October 28, 2024
Abstract
It has been a widely growing interest in using silicon carbide (SiC)
in high-power electronic devices. Yet, SiC wafers may contain killer defects that could reduce fabrication yield and make the device fall into
unexpected failures. To prevent these failures from happening, it is very
important to develop inspection tools that can detect, characterize and
locate these defects in a non-invasive way. Current inspection techniques
such as Dark Field or Bright field microscopy are effectively able to visualize most such defects; however, there are some scenarios where the
inspection becomes problematic or almost impossible, such as when the
defects are too small or have low contrast or if the defects lie deep into
the substrate. Thus, an alternative method is needed to face these challenges. In this paper, we demonstrate the application of coherent Fourier
scatterometry (CFS) as a complementary tool in addition to the conventional techniques to overcome different and problematic scenarios of killer
defects inspection on SiC samples. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM)
has been used to assess the same defects to validate the findings of CFS.
Great consistency has been demonstrated in the comparison between the
results obtained with CFS and SEM.
1
Introduction
Silicon carbide (SiC) has earned its place in the semiconductor industry and
its applications especially in power electronic devices [1–3]. SiC-based devices
are mainly known for their high thermal conductivity, a large bandgap, and also
their high break-down electric fields [4]. SiC is transparent, but its transparency
varies with wavelength. This is due to the material’s electronic structure, with
the material being more transparent at longer wavelengths. At visible wavelengths, the real part of n ∼2.6 and the imaginary part is low, indicating
1
arXiv:2312.13290v1  [physics.app-ph]  20 Nov 2023

===== Page 2 =====

low absorption. However, at shorter wavelengths, the imaginary part increases.
As a result, its use has been rapidly growing in power electronic devices such
as aerospace materials, automotive driving, and high power converters [5–7].
They can be considered as the third generation of semiconductor which also
happens to show a better performance compared to silicon (Si) and gallium
arsenide (GaAs) as the first and second generations of semiconductors, respectively [8].Yet, due to fabrication issues, SiC wafers might still contain a variety
of defects that can put the device’s performance at risk [9–15]. Defects in such
semiconductor wafers can be classified into two categories - crystallographic defects found within the wafer, and morphological defects present on or near the
wafer surface. The so-called killer defects that can cause device deterioration
are mostly morphological and have been identified and classified [16–20].
In order to avoid failures in the fabrication of devices on SiC wafers, defect inspection plays an important role.
In the literature, one finds several
high resolution imaging techniques that are used for inspection such as electron microscopy (TEM and SEM), atomic force microscopy (AFM), near field
microscopy (SNOM). Although these techniques provide a high resolution mapping of the location and shape of the defects, there are drawbacks such as low
throughput, invasiveness and they are not easily applicable for in-line inspection [21–27].
These drawbacks can be avoided if one considers far field optical-based techniques such as optical coherence tomography (OCT), dark field (DF), bright
Field (BF) or confocal differential interference contrast microscopy (CDIC)
[28–32]. Among these methods, both BF and DF microscopy have proven to
be the most optimal options, primarily due to their remarkable speed and costeffectiveness .Yet there are difficulties in applying them when it comes to resolve
the shape of very small and/or low contrast defects located on the surface or
deeper within the sample.
In these scenarios a complementary approach is
needed to deal with the challenging defects.
In this paper, we present a new approach for defect characterization, namely
Coherent Fourier Scatterometry (CFS) [33–36]. We show that by using CFS a
complete characterization of killer defects such as stacking faults and polytype
inclusions on 4H-SiC wafer can be obtained with high visibility. To validate
and compare CFS with other techniques, the same sample has been inspected
with BF and DF microscopy. Also, SEM was used as a calibration tool (ground
truth).
Given that this method is a far field scattering technique that uses
low light power and it is not limited by diffraction, we believe that it can be
considered as a complementary tool to BF and DF microscopy in scenarios like
partially buried defects or isolated defects that are very small in at least one
dimension such as thin lines.
In addition, since the light is focused on the
sample, the scattered signal is less affected by neighboring structures as it is the
case of DF microscopy. For defects that lie deeper into the sample, re-focusing
could be used. At last, since most of the killer defects are of the extended type,
inspection is required for each step of the production. Therefore, the inspection
needs to be conducted throughout the process flow, meaning that an in-line
and non-destructive method is crucial. CFS also fits these needs since it can be
2

===== Page 3 =====

made very compact and easy to be mounted in in-line tools.
2
CFS technique and experimental setup
Scatterometry-based techniques utilize the properties of scattered light to extract information about the object being illuminated. In our implementation,
we use coherent light from a laser source to illuminate the object and observe
the scattered light in the far field. The details of the setup are shown in Figure
1. A collimated He-Ne laser with a wavelength of λ = 632nm passes through a
non-polarising 50-50% beam splitter (BS1). The input light is linearly polarized
in arbitrary direction before it passes through the beam splitter BS1(hereby we
note that the polarization direction has negligible effect on the detection of the
defects). The light then is focused on the sample plane by a high numerical
aperture objective (NA=0.9). In this approach, the high numerical aperture
objective allows us to illuminate the sample and collect the diffracted field in a
large number of angles in one shot.
The sample is mounted on a 2D piezo-electric stage (Physik Instrumente
P-629.2CD) that is programmed to be moved in the lateral direction in raster
scan mode. The focus position can also be adapted with a 1D piezo-electric
stage (Physik Instrumente P-620.ZCD). Given that the focus depth is very short
(∼1µm), one can focus the light onto different depths within the sample. The
reflected and scattered field is captured by the same objective lens and directed
back to BS1. However, due to the small depth of focus, finding the correct
focal plane is challenging. We solved this issue by allowing the reflected beam
from the sample to interfere with a reference beam by placing temporarily a
mirror at the open port of beam splitter BS1(not shown in Figure 1). In this
case, when flat interference fringes are observed between the two beams, we can
ensure that the light is focused on the sample plane. The reference beam is
then removed during the data acquisition. The back focal plane of the objective
is imaged simultaneously into the camera and the split detector (ODD3W2 BiCell Silicon Photodiode) using the telescope arrangements formed by lenses L1,
L2 and L3. The camera is only used for general localization of features on the
sample. The split detector is a bi-cell detector, i.e., a detector whose area is
divided in two halves, with the latter being aligned perpendicular to the scan
direction of one line of the raster scan.
During the scan, the photocurrents
of the two halves of the detector are subtracted from each other, resulting in
a differential photo-current I−that is recorded for every scan position. After
the raster scan, a 2D mapping with the values of I−for each scan position are
plotted in a 2D graph. In order to interpret the scan maps, one can see that
if there are no defects on the sample, the photo-current I−∼0 (given that
the scattered signal will correspond to the spurious reflection of the sample).
However, when a defect passes through the focused light beam while the stage is
being scanned, the far field will show asymmetries and will generate a non-zero
I−.
3

===== Page 4 =====

Figure 1: The schematic of the CFS setup. The sample is placed on the stage
with a piezo-electric translator, BS1 and BS2: 50-50 non-polarizing beamsplitters, L1, L2, and L3: positive lenses; Camera: CCD camera used for localizing
features on the sample; SD: split detector (bi-cell silicon photodiode). A collimated and uniform He-Ne laser is used as the coherent source. The split detector
is aligned perpendicular to the scan direction of one line of the raster scan.
4

===== Page 5 =====

3
Results and Discussion
Most defects are formed through the production process in which they not only
occur on the substrate but are also generated or even modified by other layers
during the wafer planarization process. As a result, the majority of defects can
be classified as extended defects.
Here, we measured defects on a 4H-SiC wafer with four degrees off-cut angle
and 12±2 µm thickness that includes four killer defects, three stacking faults,
and one polytype inclusion. As BF and DF microscopy are the primary methodologies for general surface inspection, we have first obtained DF and BF images
from a Keyence digital microscope (model VHX-6000). Furthermore, to verify
the capabilities of CFS to detect such defects, we compared the defect shape
with SEM images (Novanano, captured at 10 KV with 1000X and some with
800X magnification). In the coming subsections, we show the results.
It should be noted that besides the observation of the aimed killer defects,
some images show extra particles around the defects. This is due to the fact
that the data has been captured in different labs and over different days. Unfortunately, the samples tend to accumulate dirt and contaminants from the
environment. To avoid causing any damage to the samples, cleaning procedures
have not been pursued.
3.1
Stacking Faults
Extended defects with a planar shape are generally classified into three different
groups named, stacking fault, stacking fault propagated, and stacking fault
complex. Stacking faults usually appear triangular with a distant outline on the
surface of SiC wafers. Propagated stacking faults have a trapezoidal structure.
Our sample did not contain any stacking fault propagated and therefore we only
have results for the stacking fault. Here, Figure 2(a)-(d) show the BF and DF
images, the CFS scattering map and SEM image, respectively. One can clearly
see that although all methods are able to detect the defect, CFS shows a better
visibility with respect to the background as compared to the other techniques.
In addition, when comparing BF and DF images with CFS, the latter recovers
the object even if it is not in one plane on the substrate but could extend deep
into the substrate.
The next detected defect was the Stacking fault complex, which is usually
called carrot. This is also a major morphological defect that has a shape of a
long and thin needle that gradually becomes even thinner at one end of the line.
In Figure 3 we show images of two different carrots obtained with BF(Figure
3(a) and (c)) and DF images (Figure 3(b) and (d)). In Figure 4 we compare the
detection of the same carrot defects using CFS (Figure 4(a) and (c)) and SEM
(Figure 4(b) and (d)). Similar argument with the previous defect is also valid
here. The thick head and thin tail of the defect is clearly visible with CFS and
not so clear using the other techniques.
To compare the detected signal from the defect and the surrounding background for both CFS and BF, the visibility was determined in various regions
5

===== Page 6 =====

of the second Stacking Fault shown in Fig. 3(c) (BF) and Fig. 4(c) (CFS) by
averaging the background (Ibackground) and taking the intensity of the defect
(Isignal) at various points within the defect. The visibility is obtained from the
expression V =(Idefect −Ibackground)/(Idefect +Ibackground). The values around
the thinner tail region of the defect were V = 0.06 for BF and V = 0.8 for CFS.
If one would take the brightest value within the defect (around the the middle
of the defect), the visibility V = 0.35 for BF, while the corresponding value for
CFS was V ∼1. The visibilities of the other defects shown in Fig. 2, 3, and 4
are also in the same order.
Figure 2: (a) and (b) BF and DF images of the stacking fault defect, respectively.
(c) CFS scan map of the stacking fault defect, and (d) SEM image of the same
defect.
Figure 3: (a) and (c) BF images of different defects, and (b) and (d) DF images
corresponding to (a) and (c), respectively.
6

===== Page 7 =====

Figure 4: (a)(c) and (b)(d) represent the CFS scan map (left colunm) and the
SEM images (right colunm) of these defects.
Figure 5: (a) is a BF image of the defect while (b) and (c) are also DF images
of the same defects. (c) is saturated in order to see the entire defect.
7

===== Page 8 =====

3.2
Polytype inclusion
Polytype inclusion defects are another type of morphological defect that appear
as triangular with long and thin arms with a big spherical particle called downfall
located at the apex of the triangle.
Polytype inclusion could be formed by
dropping a foreign material during the process of epitaxial growth on the SiC
epilayer.
Figure 5(a) shows the BF image of a polytype inclusion, while Figure (b) and
(c) are both DF images with different powers. Figure 5(c) is saturated in order
to reveal parts of the defect that are buried. Figure 6(a) shows the scattering
CFS map and Figure 6(b) and (c) the SEM image of the same defect. The
two SEM images are obtained at 10 and 30 KV, respectively to also highlight
different parts of the defect. By comparing these images, one can see that with
CFS, the triangle next to the big spherical defect is clearly revealed (see also
the inset of Figure 6(a)) while all other techniques (BF, DF and SEM) fail to
image it properly. We believe that this is due to two reasons: first, the contrast
was too low, and second, the triangle is in a different depth than the downfall.
This is one scenario where both optical microscopy and SEM would fail to
have a comprehensive inspection due to the low penetration depth and/or low
contrast. Therefore, when it comes to very narrow and features that lie partially
outside the sample plane, CFS can outperform the conventional methods and
become a complementary tool to them. The comparison between the results of
all techniques indeed shows good consistency and demonstrates CFS’s capability
in visualizing and locating killer defects.
Figure 6: (a) CFS scan map, (b) and (c) are SEM images of the same defect
with 10 and 30 KV, respectively. In the inset in 6(a) we highlight the parts of
the defect that is not clearly observed with other techniques.
8

===== Page 9 =====

4
Conclusion
In this paper, we demonstrate CFS as an inspection technique for defect detection on SiC wafers that could be considered as a complementary tool to optical
microscopy. It offers some advantages including its superior visibility with respect to the background and its ability to detect defects within the substrate.
We present a proof-of-principle experiment of the technique at one wavelength (635 nm) and one numerical aperture (NA=0.9) but other wavelengths
or NAs could be used as well. Shorter wavelengths/high NA are ideal for studying smaller defects, while longer wavelengths could be used to look deeper in to
the sample due to longer penetration depth. Even though CFS is not an imaging
technique, we have shown that it is perfectly able to determine the shape and
other details of killer defects on SiC wafers. The results shown here were verified by SEM and even though the defects are visible using all techniques, CFS
scattering maps provide very high visibility thanks to the differential detection
scheme that highlights asymmetries of the scattered field due to the presence
of the defect interacting the light beam. Furthermore, since CFS collects the
scattering from different depths within the focal depth at once, it allows us to
detect parts of the defect that are extended and formed in different layers in a
much better way than the SEM. The major drawback so far of CFS is that it
is scanning technique and it is relatively slow compared to DF or BF. In the
work we show here, the scanning was performed with piezo-electric translator
and it takes a couple of minutes to obtain an entire scan map. Thus in order to
make this technique applicable for large area inspection, further developments
are needed towards fast scan combined with parallel probes techniques such as
parallel optical data storage or real time confocal microscopy.
Funding
This work is financed by the Project 20IND09 “PowerElec” within the program
EMPIR. The project is jointly supported by the European Commission and the
participating countries within the European Association of National Metrology
Institutes (EURAMET).
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge AIXTRON for providing high quality state-of-the-art samples
that have been used for these measurements and for fruitful discussions on
different types of defects on SiC wafers.
References
[1] Frederic Monteverde and Luigi Scatteia. Resistance to thermal shock and
to oxidation of metal diborides–SiC ceramics for aerospace application. J.
9

===== Page 10 =====

Am. Ceram. Soc., 90(4):1130–1138, 2007.
[2] Tsunenobu Kimoto. Material science and device physics in SiC technology
for high-voltage power devices. Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 54(4):040103, 2015.
[3] Wolfgang Wondrak, Raban Held, Ekkehard Niemann, and Ulrich Schmid.
SiC devices for advanced power and high-temperature applications. IEEE
Trans. Ind. Electron. IEEE T IND ELECTRON, 48(2):307–308, 2001.
[4] Tsunenobu Kimoto. High-voltage SiC power devices for improved energy
efficiency. Proc. Jpn. Acad. B, 98(4):161–189, 2022.
[5] Giuseppe Mauromicale, Angelo Raciti, Santi Agatino Rizzo, Giovanni
Susinni, Luigi Abbatelli, Simone Buonomo, Daniela Cavallaro, and Vittorio Giuffrida. SiC power modules for traction inverters in automotive
applications. In IECON 2019-45th Annual Conference of the IEEE Industrial Electronics Society, volume 1, pages 1973–1978. IEEE, 2019.
[6] Wei Wang, Qiang Song, Shuo Zhang, Yiting Li, Mukhtiar Ahmad, and
Yansong Gong. The loss analysis and efficiency optimization of power inverter based on SiC mosfet s under the high-switching frequency. IEEE
Trans. Ind. Appl., 57(2):1521–1534, 2020.
[7] Stefania Castelletto, Alberto Peruzzo, Cristian Bonato, Brett C Johnson, Marina Radulaski, Haiyan Ou, Florian Kaiser, and Joerg Wrachtrup.
Silicon carbide photonics bridging quantum technology. ACS Photonics,
9(5):1434–1457, 2022.
[8] Bj¨orn Hult, Mattias Thorsell, Jr-Tai Chen, and Niklas Rorsman. High voltage and low leakage GaN-SiC mishemts on a “buffer-free” heterostructure.
IEEE Electron Device Lett, 43(5):781–784, 2022.
[9] Hiroki Sakakima, So Takamoto, Asuka Hatano,
and Satoshi Izumi.
Temperature-dependent stacking fault energies of 4H–SiC: A first-principles
study. J. Appl. Phys., 127(12):125703, 2020.
[10] J Hassan, A Henry, PJ McNally, and JP Bergman. Characterization of the
carrot defect in 4H–SiC epitaxial layers. J. Cryst. Growth, 312(11):1828–
1837, 2010.
[11] Edward Van Brunt, Albert Burk, Daniel J Lichtenwalner, Robert Leonard,
Shadi Sabri, Donald A Gajewski, Andrew Mackenzie, Brett Hull, Scott
Allen, and John W Palmour. Performance and reliability impacts of extended epitaxial defects on 4H–SiC power devices. In Mater. Sci. Forum.,
volume 924, pages 137–142. Trans Tech Publ, 2018.
[12] Shenghuang Lin, Zhiming Chen, Ying Yang, Sujuan Liu, Yintu Ba, Lianbi
Li, and Chen Yang. Formation and evolution of micropipes in SiC crystals.
CrystEngComm, 14(5):1588–1594, 2012.
10

===== Page 11 =====

[13] Haizheng Song and Tangali S Sudarshan. Basal plane dislocation conversion
near the epilayer/substrate interface in epitaxial growth of 4 off-axis 4H–
SiC. J. Cryst. Growth., 371:94–101, 2013.
[14] Mina Abadier, Haizheng Song, Tangali S Sudarshan, Yoosuf N Picard, and
Marek Skowronski. Glide of threading edge dislocations after basal plane
dislocation conversion during 4H–SiC epitaxial growth. J. Cryst. Growth.,
418:7–14, 2015.
[15] Tsuneo Kurita, Koji Miyake, Kenji Kawata, Kiwamu Ashida, and Tomohisa Kato. Development of new complex machining technology for single
crystal silicon carbide polishing. J. Autom. Technol., 10(5):786–793, 2016.
[16] T Hatakeyama, K Ichinoseki, K Fukuda, N Higuchi, and K Arai. Evaluation of the quality of commercial silicon carbide wafers by an optical
non-destructive inspection technique. J. Cryst. Growth., 310(5):988–992,
2008.
[17] Passapong Wutimakun, Chumpol Buteprongjit, and Jun Morimoto. Nondestructive three-dimensional observation of defects in semi-insulating
6H–SiC single-crystal wafers using a scanning laser microscope (slm)
and infrared light-scattering tomography (ir-lst).
J. Cryst. Growth.,
311(14):3781–3786, 2009.
[18] Tsunenobu Kimoto. Bulk and epitaxial growth of silicon carbide. Prog.
Cryst. Growth Charact. Mater., 62(2):329–351, 2016.
[19] Jianqiu Guo, Yu Yang, Balaji Raghothamachar, Taejin Kim, Michael Dudley, and Jungyu Kim.
Understanding the microstructures of triangular
defects in 4H–SiC homoepitaxial. J. Cryst. Growth., 480:119–125, 2017.
[20] Lixia Zhao. Surface defects in 4H–SiC homoepitaxial layers. Nanotechnol.
Precis. Eng., 3(4):229–234, 2020.
[21] SA Sakwe, R M¨uller, and PJ Wellmann. Optimization of KOH etching
parameters for quantitative defect recognition in n-and p-type doped SiC.
J. Cryst. Growth., 289(2):520–526, 2006.
[22] A Severino, C Frewin, C Bongiorno, R Anzalone, SE Saddow, and F La Via.
Structural defects in (100) 3C- SiC heteroepitaxy: Influence of the buffer
layer morphology on generation and propagation of stacking faults and
microtwins. Diam. Relat. Mater., 18(12):1440–1449, 2009.
[23] Sandeep Mahajan, MV Rokade, ST Ali, K Srinivasa Rao, NR Munirathnam, TL Prakash, and DP Amalnerkar. Investigation of micropipe and
defects in molten KOH etching of 6H n-silicon carbide (SiC) single crystal.
Mater. Lett., 101:72–75, 2013.
11

===== Page 12 =====

[24] F La Via, A Severino, R Anzalone, C Bongiorno, G Litrico, M Mauceri,
M Schoeler, P Schuh, and P Wellmann. From thin film to bulk 3C-SiC
growth: Understanding the mechanism of defects reduction.
Mater Sci
Semicond Process., 78:57–68, 2018.
[25] AJ Steckl, MD Roth, JA Powell, and DJ Larkin. Atomic probe microscopy
of 3C SiC films grown on 6H SiC substrates. Appl. Phys. Lett., 62(20):2545–
2547, 1993.
[26] Johan B Malherbe, NG Van Der Berg, AJ Botha, E Friedland, Thulani Thokozani Hlatshwayo, Remeredzai Joseph Kuhudzai, E Wendler,
W Wesch, P Chakraborty, and EF Da Silveira. SEM analysis of ion implanted SiC. Nucl Instrum Methods Phys Res B NUCL INSTRUM METH
B., 315:136–141, 2013.
[27] Shota Monno, Yoshifumi Kamada, Hiroyoshi Miwa, Koji Ashida, and
Tadaaki Kaneko. Detection of defects on sic substrate by SEM and classification using deep learning. In Advances in Intelligent Networking and Collaborative Systems: The 10th International Conference on Intelligent Networking and Collaborative Systems (INCoS-2018), pages 47–58. Springer,
2019.
[28] Lawrence S Chan. Emerging biomedical imaging optical coherence tomography. In Med. Eng., pages 256–266. CRC Press, 2019.
[29] A Gh Podoleanu. Optical coherence tomography. J. Microsc., 247(3):209–
219, 2012.
[30] Pei Ma, Jiajie Ni, Jiawei Sun, Xuedian Zhang, Junyin Li, and Hui Chen.
Three-dimensional detection and quantification of defects in SiC by optical
coherence tomography. Appl. Opt., 59(6):1746–1755, 2020.
[31] Hideki
Sako,
Tamotsu
Yamashita,
Naoyuki
Sugiyama,
Junichiro
Sameshima, Osamu Ishiyama, Kentaro Tamura, Junji Senzaki, Hirofumi
Matsuhata, Makoto Kitabatake, and Hajime Okumura. Characterization
of scraper-shaped defects on 4H–SiC epitaxial film surfaces. Jpn J Appl
Phys, 53(5):051301, 2014.
[32] Makoto Kitabatake, Hideki Sako, Masayuki Sasaki, Tamotsu Yamashita,
Kentaro Tamura, Keiichi Yamada, Osamu Ishiyama, Junji Senzaki, and Hirohumi Matsuhata. Electrical characteristics/reliability affected by defects
analyzed by the integrated evaluation platform for sic epitaxial films. In
Mater. Sci. Forum, volume 778, pages 979–984. Trans Tech Publ, 2014.
[33] S Roy, Maryse Bouwens, Lei Wei, SF Pereira, HP Urbach, and P Van
Der Walle. High speed low power optical detection of sub-wavelength scatterer. Rev. Sci. Instrum, 86(12):123111, 2015.
12

===== Page 13 =====

[34] D Kolenov, IE Zadeh, RC Horsten, and SF Pereira. Direct detection of
polystyrene equivalent nanoparticles with a diameter of 21 nm (
λ/19)
using coherent fourier scatterometry. Opt. Express, 29(11):16487–16505,
2021.
[35] Dmytro Kolenov and SF Pereira. Machine learning techniques applied for
the detection of nanoparticles on surfaces using coherent fourier scatterometry. Opt. Express, 28(13):19163–19186, 2020.
[36] Dmytro Kolenov, D Davidse, J Le Cam, and SF Pereira. Convolutional
neural network applied for nanoparticle classification using coherent scatterometry data. Appl. Opt., 59(27):8426–8433, 2020.
13
