

===== Page 1 =====

A scanning probe microscopy approach for identifying defects in aluminum oxide
Leah Tom,1 Zachary J. Krebs,1 Joel B. Varley,2 E. S. Joseph,1 Wyatt A. Behn,1 M. A. Eriksson,1
Keith G. Ray,2 Vincenzo Lordi,2 S. N. Coppersmith,3 Victor W. Brar,1 and Mark Friesen1
1Department of Physics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA
2Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, California 94550, USA
3School of Physics, University of New South Wales, Sydney NSW 2052, Australia
(Dated: December 30, 2025)
The coherence of quantum dot qubits fabricated
in semiconductors is often limited by charge
noise from defects in gate dielectrics, which are
material- and process-dependent.
Characterizing these defects is an important step towards
reducing their impact and improving qubit coherence. The identification of individual defects
requires atomic-scale spatial resolution, however,
and sufficient spectral sensitivity to determine
their electronic structure. Electrostatic force microscopy (EFM) provides highly resolved maps
of the surface potential of dielectrics, and importantly, is also sensitive to single-electron charging processes that reflect the spectral structure
of underlying defects.
In this work, we use
cryogenic EFM to characterize aluminum oxide
grown by atomic layer deposition (ALD) on bulk
silicon. These measurements reveal defects close
to the surface that exchange electrons with the
EFM tip as they transition through different
charge states.
Detailed electrostatic modeling
opens the door to powerful techniques for mapping tip-backgate charging voltages onto defect
transition energies, allowing defects such as aluminum vacancies, and carbon, oxygen, or hydrogen impurities to be identified, by comparing to
density functional theory (DFT). These results
point towards EFM as a powerful tool for exploring defect structures in solid-state qubits.
The fidelities of gate operations in quantum dot qubits
are often limited by charge noise [1, 2]. A principal noise
sources is charge traps in gate dielectrics [3], including
crystalline vacancies, interstitials, impurities, and dangling bonds [4–7]. Identifying and understanding these
defects is an important step towards mitigating their effects.
Various characterization techniques have therefore been used to probe the physical, chemical and electronic structure of the defects [8], including deep-level
transient spectroscopy [9], positron annihilation spectroscopy [10], time-dependent defect spectroscopy [11],
electron spin resonance [12, 13], X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy [14, 15], spectroscopic ellipsometry
[16],
and charge-pumping spectroscopy [17–20]. While these
approaches are able to chemically identify the defects
and measure their energy levels, they typically rely on
spatial averaging to characterize large ensembles and
therefore do not provide details about the spatial locations or depths of defects below the surface. Although in
some cases it may be possible to resolve single defects,
when they are well isolated [19, 20], these techniques do
not have sufficient resolution to distinguish the behavior
of closely spaced defects.
Scanning probe methods have been developed to address these problems by simultaneously imaging and
probing the electronic properties of atomic-scale objects
at non-conducting surfaces, including impurities, atoms,
molecules, and quantum dots. In particular, electrostatic
force microscopes (EFM) are used to measure changes
in the bias-dependent electrostatic force on a microscope tip due to charge rearrangement in the sample
induced by electrostatic fields from the tip itself. Moreover, the tip bias provides a direct knob for manipulating the reorganized charges and their corresponding
electron states [21–30]. This technique can be applied
in a variety of ways to study these systems. For example, discrete charging events may be observed as sudden
jumps in the bias-dependent EFM resonant frequency
shift [21, 22, 24, 31]. This has been used to probe individual molecules [32, 33] and impurity states on insulating
surfaces [21, 23, 24, 31, 34, 35], weakly-coupled quantum dots [25, 26], and metallic nanoparticles [36, 37].
Alternatively, the bias-dependence of the dissipation of
an EFM cantilever can be used to probe charge motion
in a sample, either due to electron tunneling or charge reorganization associated with certain defect states. The
latter technique has been used to probe subsurface interface states [38, 39] and quantum dots [40]. Two other
quantities in EFM experiments that contain information
about charging events in dielectrics include the effective tip-sample separation and the corresponding biasdependent capacitance [35, 41].
But while these various signals and methods can provide defect maps, they
do not typically yield spectroscopic information about
the underlying electronic states, as required for chemical analysis. For example, converting tip bias measurements (which carry information about charge reorganization) to defect energies requires detailed knowledge
about the tip-sample geometry and its associated electrostatics. While several models have been employed to
perform these conversions, they often over-simplify the
tip geometry, and are most effective when the system
arXiv:2512.22369v1  [cond-mat.mes-hall]  26 Dec 2025

===== Page 2 =====

2
Vb
0
1
Potential, 𝜙(r) (V)
Tip
Silicon
Vacuum
Backgate
2500 nm
𝜙(Vb,rd)
z (nm)
𝜙(z) (V)
-4
-2
0
2
0.4
0.2
0
Tip
Oxide
Vac
Vb (V)
∆f (Hz)
-2
-1
0
+1
eVAl-H
∆f
Tip
A
C
D
∆ ∝ -e𝜙(Vb,rd) (eV)
Eq (eV)
q = +1
q = -2
q = -1
q = 0
B
VCPD(r) 
E
VCPD
∆ (eV)
0
4
-2
-1
+1
0
Vb
Figure 1. Experimental setup. (A) Schematic of a typical electrostatic force microscope (EFM) experiment: an oscillating tip
is raster-scanned in vacuum across a sample comprised of Al2O3 grown atop a silicon substrate with a backgate. Interactions
between the tip and charged defects in the oxide cause a change in the tip resonant frequency ∆f as a function of the
tip-backgate bias voltage Vb. The color-scale plot shows a spatial map of the measured contact potential (CPD) difference,
Vb = VCPD, that maximizes ∆f at a given location. Variations in VCPD are caused by charged defects near the sample surface.
(B) Electrostatic simulations are used to compute the electrostatic potential at the location of the defect ϕ(Vb, rd). (Here, Vb
= 1 V.) The inset shows a linecut directly below the tip, corresponding to the dashed line in the main figure. Note that the
oxide layer is not labeled here, because its much smaller thickness (60 nm) is not visible on the larger scale of the image. (C)
Schematic variations of the resonant frequency as a function of bias (an f-V curve). Jumps indicate discrete charging events,
as electrons tunnel between the tip and the defect. (Defect charge states are indicated.) (D) A corresponding energy diagram,
with matching colors, as a function of the chemical potential of the defect. The lowest-energy states are indicated by thick
lines. (E) A corresponding charge-occupancy-chemical-potential diagram, which we use to identify the chemical species of the
defect by comparing to density functional theory (DFT) calculations.
details known a priori.
This work expands on previous techniques by developing EFM as a general tool for probing and identifying distributions of defect species on dielectric surfaces, which
are not known in advance. We perform measurements
of an Al2O3 sample grown by atomic layer deposition
(ALD), on which we observe a high density of charged
defects and many single-electron charging events. These
are detected as sudden jumps in the EFM resonance frequency as a function of tip bias and, in many cases, for
multiple biases at the same tip location.
The charging events are position dependent, and by repeating our
measurements as a function of lateral and vertical tip position, we are able to estimate the tip shape and defect
depth. Using this information, we then perform electrostatic simulations to estimate the defect energy levels.
The results are finally compared to a survey of energy
levels of candidate defect species obtained from density
functional theory (DFT). We find that this approach
provides reasonable guesses about the defect identities,
despite the high density of defects and disorder at the
sample surface.
Results
EFM measurements. A schematic illustration of the
experimental setup and technique is shown in Fig. 1. The
sample is formed of 60 nm of Al2O3 grown atop a 381 µm
silicon wafer, as described in Methods and Materials. A
quartz-cantilever (qPlus) EFM tip is used to probe the
sample surface in non-contact, constant-frequency mode
at a temperature of 4.5 K and ultra-high vacuum (UHV)
conditions. Below, we refer to the grid points of this scan
as “pixels.” For many of the images obtained here, the
pixels are spaced by 0.5 nm, although in several cases the
grid spacings can be as small as 0.1 nm. A topography
map obtained by non-contact atomic force microscopy

===== Page 3 =====

3
×
×
C
A
-2.0
-1.0
0
1.0
Height (nm)
1.8
5 nm
b
a
a
b
2*
*
8
Tip bias, Vb (V)
B
0
VCPD (V)
0.0
-0.5
D
Charging voltage (V)
*
2
*
8
4.5
3.5
3.0
2.5
Charging voltage (V)
E
*
8
*
2
F
VCPD, a
VCPD, b
Δf (Hz) 
0
-2
4
0
2
Tip bias, Vb (V)
+2
-1
-2
5
0
2.5
Noncompact 
Defect identification
-1.0
-1.5
Uncertain matches
CO-H
VAl-H
VO
CO
CAl-H
Too few pixels 
-2.5
5
0
2.5
-2.5
0.5
-2.0
-2.5
4.0
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-2.5
-2.5
-5
-5
-7.5
-7.5
-10
-10
12
8
6
17
1
19
11
2
4
13
20
10
7
9
5
Figure 2.
EFM results. Note that all scale bars in this figure are 5 nm. (A) Topography map of the oxide-on-silicon sample
studied in this work, obtained via nc-AFM. (B) f-V curves are obtained for every pixel in a CPD map; several examples
are shown here. Special features include maxima, corresponding to Vb = VCPD,a(b) (left-hand side), and charging transitions,
corresponding to Vb = Vtransition (right-hand side), with charging states identified by different colored regions (see SI Appendix,
section S11). Here, a, b, 2, and 8 refer to distinct pixels, whose locations are shown in the maps of panels C-E. In particular,
pixels 2 and 8 coincide with the centers of Defects 2 and 8, as identified in F. Following procedures described in the main
text, only one charging transition was considered for Defects 2 and 8. (C) A VCPD map describing the same scan region
as A. (D,E) Maps of Vtransition for the same scan region, within the voltage range indicated by color bars. (White pixels
indicate that no transitions are observed in this range.) (F) Colored regions indicate the pixels assigned to different defects,
as determined by the clustering algorithm, for 15 different defects. (Five other defects were identified using high-resolution
scans.) The color bar indicates our best guesses for defect species, according to the “single-defect analysis” described below,
based on comparison with DFT. Hatched regions indicate overlapping defects, whose charging transitions can still be uniquely
identified. Defects whose chemical species could not be identified are also shown in color, and fall into three main categories:
(i) charging transitions in the forward and backward bias sweeps that cannot be matched (‘Uncertain matches’); (ii) defects
that are too irregular in shape (‘Noncompact’); or (iii) that have too few pixels assigned to them by the combined clustering
and Gaussian-mixture algorithms (‘Too few pixels’).
(nc-AFM) is shown Fig. 2A for a 25 × 25 nm2 portion of
sample, revealing an average roughness of 1.5 nm.
We also perform EFM measurements at each pixel location.
Here, the feedback loop is turned off and the
change in the tip resonance frequency ∆f is recorded as
a function of the tip-sample bias Vb, as shown for two
different pixels on the left-hand side of Fig. 2B. Such
curves are referred to as “f-V ” curves and are central
to our analysis. As illustrated schematically in Fig. 1C,
the curves are roughly parabolic in shape, with a maximum occurring at the voltage VCPD for which the contact
potential difference (CPD) between the tip and sample
is zero [30, 42–44]. CPD maps are a common product
of Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) experiments,
where they characterize the work function difference between the tip and backgate, modulated by local fluctuations of the electrostatic potential. Figures 1A and 2C
show CPD maps obtained for the same region of sample
as Fig. 2A. The points labeled a and b correspond to the
f-V curves in Fig. 2B. Although these points are separated by only ∼5 nm, their VCPD values are distinct,
highlighting the sensitivity of EFM to local electrostatic
environments.
The f-V curves also display prominent jumps, representing single-electron charging events between the tip
and a defect near the sample surface [21, 23–26, 31, 36].
The charging process and its effect on scanning probe
measurements is illustrated in Fig. 1B-D. Here, the tip
bias Vb causes strong gradients of the electrostatic potential ϕ near the vacuum/oxide interface, with corresponding changes in the defect’s chemical potential. Under appropriate conditions, charging or discharging can
occur, if the tip and defect are close enough to allow
tunneling. (In SI Appendix, Fig. S26, we confirm tunneling as the charging mechanism by tracking hysteresis
of charging voltages as a function of tip-sample separation.) The sudden change of charge modifies the local
electrostatic potential, as manifested by a jump in the

===== Page 4 =====

4
resonant frequency of the EFM cantilever. For a wide
enough range of Vb, multiple charging events are likely
to be observed at a single pixel, which originate from
one or more defects. For example, Figs. 2D and E show
very different charging maps, for two different bias windows at the same location. Below, the combination of
local charging transitions and CPD-based spectroscopy
techniques provide powerful tools for characterizing defects and identifying their chemical species, as shown in
Fig. 2F.
Tip-sample
simulations
and
characterization.
Charging transitions can occur when a defect’s chemical potential falls below the Fermi level set by the conducting tip.
The chemical potential is modulated by
the electrostatic potential at the defect’s location ϕ(rd),
which depends on the tip shape, material work functions,
and of course, the tip-backgate bias. A key focus of this
work is to develop accurate methods for characterizing
these various parameters, as illustrated in Fig. 3. Previous work has employed parallel-plate capacitor models to
calculate the tip-defect bias ϕ(rd) [31, 37–39]. However,
such models break down when the tip-backgate separation is greater than the tip radius; for qubit devices and
for our sample, these models are inappropriate. A conical tip model provides more-accurate results for longrange tip-sample interactions [24].
However, the fine
structure of the tip point, which allows for better imaging resolution [45], can significantly modify the shortrange interactions.
In this work, we adopt a realistic
model of a parabolically terminated conical tungsten tip
with a nanometer-scale protruding apex, as illustrated
in Fig. 3B, whose endpoint has been coated with Au by
poking into a gold pad. The tip parameters that play a
role in our simulations and in defect characterization are
also listed in the figure. The procedures used to determine these parameters are described in Methods, with
details given in the SI Appendices.
The oxide-on-silicon sample studied here accommodates a high density of charged defects near the sample surface [46]. Indeed, our EFM measurements suggest that the tip interacts with many defects simultaneously, making individual identifications challenging.
Each defect can also undergo multiple charging transitions, further complicating their identification. In this
work, we apply a combination of techniques to systematically isolate individual defects. We then assign chargetransition voltages Vtransition to the defects. This procedure is complicated by the fact that the charging voltage
is hysteretic with respect to forward and backward bias
sweeps, and depends on the tip-defect separation. Finally, the transition voltages are converted to chemical
potentials ∆, like those illustrated in Fig. 1D. The series
of procedures used to extract defect chemical potentials
from EFM measurements are summarized in Methods,
with details given in SI Appendix.
Defect identification.
Defects are identified chemically by comparing our estimates of ∆from EFM measurements to those from DFT calculations. The latter
are obtained for a set of seven candidate point defects
in Al2O3, including native defects like aluminum and
oxygen vacancies (VAl, VO), substitutional impurities
(CO), and hydrogenic complexes involving these defects
(VAl-H, VAl-2H, CAl-H, CO-H). (See Methods for details.) Each defect species can host multiple charge-state
configurations, as illustrated in Figs. 1D and E. Figure 4A shows the results of DFT calculations, including
the chemical potentials ∆at which charging occurs (relative to the valence-band edge), with the corresponding
charge states labeled. For each defect species, the thin
colored bar next to the main bar illustrates the defect
color-coding scheme, used later in the figure, and its size
reflects the error bar of the DFT calculations (see SI
Appendix, section S9 B).
We employ a three-step procedure to assign the most
likely chemical species for each of the experimentally
measured defects. First, we determine the sign of the
charged defect by comparing the VCPD value of its centermost pixel to the CPD of a charge-neutral sample
(see SI Appendix, section S6); this allows us to narrow
down the set of candidate defects. We note that defects
classified as neutral at the CPD condition (Vb = VCPD)
are excluded from further consideration because, when
we account for experimental uncertainties, their true
charge sign could be masked by a nearby defect with
the opposite sign. Here, “neutral” is defined as having
a VCPD falling between the hysteretic, sample-averaged
CPD values in forward vs backward voltage scans (i.e.,
−0.33 < VCPD < −0.17 V), since this range represents
an effective error bar for our VCPD estimates. Second,
we exclude any defects for which theoretically predicted
charging transitions are not observed within the experimental bias window. However, we do allow for the possibility of observing transitions from up to three different defects at a given pixel, since the defects may be in
close proximity. Finally, from the remaining defects, we
determine the most likely candidate using a maximum
likelihood technique [47]. Here, we define a likelihood
functional
L (E(θ)
1 , . . . , E(θ)
k ) =
k
Y
i=1
1
p
2π(σ2
i + ρ2
i )
e
−1
2
(∆i−E(θ)
i
)2
σ2
i +ρ2
i
,
(1)
where θ is an index labeling the defect species, k is the
number of charging transitions predicted for that species,
E(θ)
i
is the theoretically computed chemical potential of
the ith charging transition (note that k and E(θ)
i
depend
implicitly on θ), and ∆i is the experimentally determined
chemical potential for the ith transition. The functional
also includes the experimental (theoretical) one-sigma
error bars for ∆i (E(θ)
i
), designated ρi (σi), which we
combine in quadrature. Experimental errors in our cal-

===== Page 5 =====

5
Parameters that need to be 
quantified to determine 
conversion from Vb to 𝜙(rd) 
Method used to determine 
quantity
Big tip radius, R
KPFM on gold
Height of fine tip, htip
KPFM on gold
Fine tip radius, rapex
Joint fit of lateral and vertical 
defect scans and KPFM on gold
Height of gold on fine tip, hAu
Joint fit of lateral and vertical 
defect scans and KPFM on gold
Tip-sample separation, hts
Height-dependent measurements 
of ∆f
Depth of defect in oxide, d
Bounded within tunnelling depth
B
A
htip
rapex
hAu
hts
d
WAu
WW
Energy (eV)
Evalence
Econduction
EF
WMo
hAu
Evac
-eVb 
∆
-e∆𝜙(rd)
−e∆𝜙(rd)
d
hts
Silicon
Oxide
Tungsten
z (nm)
Gold
R
Molybdenum
Figure 3.
Device and sample parameters. The experimental set-up, including (A) vertical profiles of the tip and sample,
and (B) the lateral tip geometry, in which a fine tip (left) is attached to the apex of a big tip (right). The work function
of gold (WAu) is well known, while the work functions of tungsten and molybdenum (WW and WMo) are determined in SI
Appendix, section S2 A. Unknown parameters are listed in the table and illustrated above it. These parameters are determined
as described in Fig. 5 through a series of experiments, including EFM scans as a function of tip height, above either the bare
oxide surface or a gold-coated sample. The local electrostatic potential depends on the tip height, the voltage bias Vb between
tip and back gate, and the presence of charged defects in the sample. The reference vacuum energy level (solid purple line) is
obtained at the special bias Vb = V CPD for which interactions between the tip and sample vanish. (We define the reference
with respect to the globally averaged CPD potential.) Local shifts in the electrostatic potential ∆ϕ (dashed purple line) are
computed via electrostatics simulations. A charging transition occurs when a defect’s chemical potential crosses the Fermi
energy of the tip EF , as a function of Vb. DFT calculations also provide the chemical potential for these transitions, ∆, relative
to the valance-band edge. Combining experimental measurments, DFT calculations, and electrostatics simulations allow us
to identify the chemical species of a defect.
culations include contributions from the unknown depth
of the defect, hysteresis in defect charging and discharging voltages, surface roughness, uncertainties in tip geometry parameters, and the center location of the defect.
(A further discussion of errors is given in SI Appendix,
section S9 B.)
The likelihood functional of Eq. (1) is normalized;
however, its units depend on the number of charging
transitions k. To provide a fair comparison between different defect species, with different k, we therefore define two dimensionless quantities, derived from Eq. (1).
First, we define a probability of assignment, which represents a normalized likelihood. In this case, the likelihood
functional is computed from Eq. (1), and then recomputed to give its maximum value, by setting ∆i = E(θ)
i
for each transition i.
The (dimensionless) assignment
probability is then given by the ratio of these two quantities.
We also consider the probability ratio between
the highest and second-highest probability assignments,
which provides a measure of confidence in the best assignment.
We also consider two defect assignment procedures.
The first provides a comparison between the theoretically predicted and experimentally measured charging
transitions, when just a single defect species is considered. Here, we insist that all the predicted transitions for
the defect should be observed if they fall within the experimental voltage range (see SI Appendix, section S9).
We allow for the possibility that other charging transitions, associated with nearby defects, may be present in
the data, and we do not fit those transitions. We also
allow for edge cases, in which the theoretically predicted
transitions occur within a error bar ρi of the edge of the
measurement range. We then estimate the assignment
probabilities with and without these edge transitions.
In the second assignment procedure, we simultaneously
consider multiple defects. In this case, we insist that all
experimentally observed transitions should be matched
to theoretical predictions. We note it is possible to satisfy this constraint with just a single defect (indeed, this
is a common result, as shown below); however, we still
refer to this method as “multi-defect,” for simplicity. Fi-

===== Page 6 =====

6
Table 1. Defect assignments and probabilities
Best assignment Probability of Probability
Best assignment
Probability of Probability
Defect No.
(single-defect)
assignment
ratio
(multi-defect)
assignment
ratio
1
VAl-H
0.9998
2.25
VAl, VAl-H
0.02306
2.52
2
VAl-H
0.9998
4.36
VAl, VAl-H
0.0001621
10.7
3
CO-H
0.9996
1.45
-
-
-
4
CO-H
0.9984
1.04
CAl-H, CAl-H, CO-H
0.5409
1.28
5
VO
0.9924
1.06
CAl-H, CO, VO
0.5664
1.42
6
CO-H
0.9917
1.07
CO-H, CO-H
0.9544
1.03
7
CAl-H
0.9887
1.04
VO
0.6228
1.03
8
CO-H
0.9845
1.13
CO-H
0.6987
1.16
9
CO
0.9828
1.00
CAl-H, CO
0.8565
1.65
10
VAl-H
0.9802
1.76
VAl, VAl-H
0.009246
1.72
11
CAl-H
0.9785
1.01
CAl-H, CAl-H, CO-H
0.4337
2.60
12
CO
0.9760
1.00
CAl-H, CO, VO
0.5477
1.50
13
VO
0.9498
1.04
CAl-H, VO
0.7353
1.38
14
VAl-H
0.9232
1.21
-
-
-
15
CO-H
0.9206
1.78
-
-
-
16
VAl-H
0.9046
1.22
-
-
-
17
VAl-H
0.8934
1.80
VAl, VAl-H
2.519e-05
5.13
18
CAl-H
0.8769
1.34
-
-
-
19
CAl-H
0.8762
1.38
VO
0.4725
1.16
20
VAl-H
0.8675
1.63
VAl
0.02823
32.0
Table I. The 20 defects identified in this work are listed in decreasing order of their highest probability assignment, defined
as the ratio of the likelihood [Eq. (1)] to its maximum value (see main text and SI Appendix, section S9). The probability
ratio is defined as the ratio of the best and second-best probability assignments. Single-defect assignments require all DFTpredicted charging transitions to be accounted for (except for potential edge cases), while ignoring non-predicted transitions.
Multi-defect assignments must account for all the experimentally observed charging transitions (again, making exceptions for
edge cases). In cases where only one transition occurs in the measurement window, the two methods yield the same result,
and we leave the multi-defect assignments blank.
nally, we note that edge cases are also allowed in this
method.
Figures 4B and C showcase some outcomes of this
analysis. The top panel of Fig. 4B shows the f-V curve
for the center pixel of Defect 5.
The vertical dashed
line shows the theoretical prediction that most closely
matches the charging transition seen in the data (VO,
based on the single-defect analysis). The pie chart on
the left shows the full set of assignments for this analysis and their relative probabilities. Here, the designation
(1) indicates an analysis where one of the transitions
is an ignored edge case, while the designation (2) indicates that all edge cases are included in the analysis.
The vertical dotted lines in the top panel show theoretical predictions most closely matching the full set of
charging transitions in the multi-defect analysis. (One
of the dotted lines coincides with the dashed line.) Here,
the most-probable solution corresponds to the defect set
{CAl-H, CO, VO}. The pie chart on the right shows the
full set of assignments for the multi-defect analysis.
Figure 4C describes the most-probable defect assignments for Defects 1-7, shown as bar graphs.
Here,
pink shading indicates negatively charged defects (1 and
2), while blue shading indicates positively charged defects (3-5). The experimental charging transitions and
their corresponding error bars (ρi) are shown as black
lines/gray bars. The second column in each box shows
the theoretical predictions most closely matching the experimental transitions, based on the single-defect analysis, using the color coding scheme from Fig. 4A. The
third column in each box shows the theoretical predictions most closely matching the experimental transitions,
based on the multi-defect analysis.
Table 1 summarizes our main results. Although EFM
maps suggest an abundance of defects, our analysis focuses on the clearest and least ambiguous examples,
which probably occur near the sample surface. We thus
arrive at a set of 20 defects. For each of these defects, we
provide our best guesses for their chemical assignments,
with corresponding probabilities and probability ratios.
We report results for both the single-defect (columns 2-4)
and multi-defect (columns 5-7) assignment methods. In
the latter case, the assignments may involve more than
one object; however, we retain the terminology “defects”
here, for simplicity. In the table, the defects are labeled
and ordered according to the probability estimates from
the single-defect analysis.
The table shows some interesting results. We first notice that the VAl-H complex is well represented among
the various defect assignments, often yielding high probabilities and probability ratios (e.g., Defects 1 and 2),
where the latter indicates that the second-best assign-

===== Page 7 =====

7
2.0
3.0
4.0
1.5
2.5
3.5
4.5
C
Chemical potential, ∆ (eV)
A
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
1.5
2.5
3.5
4.5
VAl
VAl-H
VAl-2H
CAl-H
CO
CO-H
VO
Charge 
state
Chemical potential, ∆ (eV)
CO-H 
(2)
CO-H
(1)
CO
(2)
CO
(1)
CAl-H
VO 
(2)
VO 
(1)
CAl-H, 
CO,
CO
CAl-H, 
CO,
VO
CAl-H, 
CO-H,
CO-H
CAl-H, 
CO ,
CO-H
CAl-H, 
VO,
VO
CAl-H, 
CO-H,
VO
Defect 5
Frequency shift (Hz)
Tip-backgate bias (V)
B
Defects
1
2
3
4
5
CAl-H, 
CO,
VO
VO 
(1)
CAl-H, 
CAl-H, 
CO-H
CO-H 
(1)
CO-H 
(1)
VAl, 
VAl-H
VAl, 
VAl-H
VAl-H 
(1)
VAl-H 
(1)
Figure 4. Identifying the chemical species of defects in Al2O3 by comparing EFM measurements and DFT analyses. (A)
Wide bars show DFT predictions for the chemical potentials (∆) of multiple charging transitions, for seven different defect
species, with charge states indicated by colors (inset). Here, ∆is referenced to the valence-band edge of Al2O3 and the gray
dashed line represents the Fermi level for the case where the vacuum potentials of the tungsten portion of the EFM tip and
the molybdenum backgate are aligned (Vb = V∆Φ, see main text). The small bars to the right of the wide bars define the
color coding used to identify the defects, below, and the length of the bar indicates the theoretical energy uncertainty σi for
a given transition i. (B) Top: the measured f-V curve for Defect 5. The vertical dashed line shows our best match (VO)
to a theoretically predicted transition, based on the single-defect analysis. The vertical dotted lines (including one behind
the dashed line) show our best theoretical matches (CAl-H, CO, and VO), based on the multi-defect analysis. Bottom: pie
charts showing the relative assignment probabilities for different defect species, based on the single-defect analysis (left) and
the multi-defect analysis (right). Here, the notation (1) indicates that one transition was ignored in the analysis, because it
was an edge case, while (2) indicates that all transitions were included in the analysis. (C) For Defects 1-5, we show our best
matches between theoretical predictions (left column) and experimentally measured charging transitions, based on the singledefect analysis (middle column) and the multi-defect analysis (right column). Here, black lines represent the experimental
transition voltages, converted to chemical potentials (see main text), the gray bars represent the experimental uncertainties for
the transition (ρi), the black boxes represent the experimental measurement range, a red background indicates a negatively
charged defect, and a blue background indicates a positively charged defect. Colored boxes are reproduced from A, with
boxes removed if they fall outside the experimental range. The defects are ordered from left to right in decreasing order of
assignment probabilities, based on the single-defect analysis.

===== Page 8 =====

8
ment is somewhat less likely than the VAl-H assignment. These results are corroborated by the multi-defect
analysis, which also favors VAl-H assignments.
Typically however, the corresponding probabilities are low
in this analysis, especially when VAl-H is paired with
VAl, indicating that VAl does not match the data very
well, despite being our best estimate. Taken together,
these results confirm the prevalence of VAl-H impurities,
but they also suggest that our DFT analysis may have
missed a defect species that is often found in the proximity of VAl-H. Thus, although VAl vacancies are listed
in the table, there is no strong evidence to support their
presence.
Other well-supported defect species include
CO-H, VO, CAl-H, and VAl-H, emphasizing the prominance of hydrogenic impurities in materials, which can
arise due to surface contamination, or defect nucleation
at OH ligands in the oxide [48].
It is also interesting
to note that, in several cases, defects listed in the table under the single-defect analysis do not appear on
the corresponding list for the multi-defect analysis. This
is a consequence of the stricter constraints used in the
multi-defect analysis, requiring that all measured transitions must be accounted for in the theory, and cannot
be ignored.
Finally, we close by highlighting an interesting, alternative approach for addressing the question of whether
multiple transitions, observed at a single pixel, can be assigned to a singe defect or to multiple defects, based on
more direct evidence. In SI Appendix, section S11, we
describe a powerful approach based on hysteresis correlations between neighboring pixels, which accurately
pinpoints the center location of a given transition. This
provides an interesting direction for future work.
Conclusions
In summary, we have demonstrated how EFM can be
used as a chemically specific tool for identifying defects
in non-metallic substrates. Building upon previous work
in which single-defect charging processes can be observed
in EFM, we show that, when combined with detailed tip
modeling, such charging processes can still reveal spectral signatures within a denser array of defects. By comparing these signatures to theoretically predicted chemical potentials for charging events, it is possible to make
informed guesses about their exact chemical structures.
The technique described here offers a complementary
approach for surface analysis, which can provide more
accurate identifications of surface impurities and lead
to more-specific techniques for surface preparation. We
note that the amorphous surface studied in this work
contains a high density of unknown defect species, representing sub-optimal conditions for our technique. Despite such challenges, we have shown that EFM can still
provide convincing guesses about the chemical identities
of the defect species. Future work using EFM to characterize defects in flat, crystalline materials with fewer
defects, such as those being explored for next-generation
quantum devices, would provide an excellent opportunity to utilize EFM with greater accuracy and reduced
uncertainty, facilitating the identification, elimination,
or mitigation of specific defects.
Materials and Methods
Sample preparation. The sample used in this study
was fabricated on a p-type Si (100) wafer with a resistivity of 10–20 Ω·cm.
Before fabrication, the wafer
was cleaned using a preliminary piranha dip, followed
by an RCA process, and a final HF dip, with the HF
diluted with deionized water to a ratio of 1:50, to remove the native oxide. A 60 nm Al2O3 dielectric layer
was then deposited by thermal atomic layer deposition
(ALD) at a substrate temperature of 250 ◦C using roomtemperature precursors trimethylaluminum (TMA) and
H20.
Tip characterization.
We adopt a realistic model
of a parabolically terminated conical tungsten tip with
a nanometer-scale protruding apex, as illustrated in
Fig. 3B, whose endpoint has been coated with Au by
poking into a gold pad.
Several tip parameters can
be deduced from height-dependent measurements of the
CPD and the tip-sample capacitance when the tip is positioned above a Au(111) surface, as described in the
caption of Fig. 5A-C. (For details, see SI Appendix, section S2.) The crossover between short- and long-ranged
interactions is demarcated by red and purple in Fig. 5A.
To determine the remaining tip parameters, we also
perform vertical and lateral scans above a defect undergoing charging transitions in the oxide-on-Si sample
studied here. Such measurements are described in the
caption of Fig. 5D-F and SI Appendix, section S2. The
combined measurements yield the following tip parameters: big-tip radius R = (1800 ± 200) nm, fine-tip height
htip = (23±2) nm, fine-tip radius rapex = (1.5±0.5) nm,
and fine-tip gold height hAu = (0.5 ± 0.3) nm. The subsurface depth of the defect used for this analysis is obtained as a byproduct, giving d = (0.65±0.35) nm. This
corroborates our intuition that defect charging transitions resulting from the tunneling of electrons to or from
the EFM tip can only occur when the defects are very
near the surface.
When applying the procedures described here for chemical analysis, we do not employ
such an arduous method for determining d in every defect. Instead, we take the defect to be located at the
sample surface (d = 0) and assign a generous error bar
of size ∆d = 2.5 nm [49].
Converting transition voltages to defect energies.
We apply a combination of techniques to systematically
isolate individual defects, as a first step to characterizing their transition energies. We now summarize one
of these procedures, leaving the details to SI Appendix,
section S4.
We first identify the charging transitions

===== Page 9 =====

9
Lateral
Vertical
∆ (eV)
Vtransition (V)
-2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
Fine tip radius, rapex (nm)
Best fit defect depth, 
d (nm)
Tip-sample separation, hts (nm)
Vtransition (V)
Distance along linecut, x𝓁 (nm)
Vtransition (V)
Log10 hts
Log10 (𝜕2𝐶 /𝜕𝑧2)
RMS error in fit to (𝜕2C /𝜕z2)
Big tip radius, R (nm)
Fine tip radius, rapex (nm)
Best fit, hAu (nm)
A
D
B
C
E
d = 0.3 nm 
(best fit)
d
hts
Gold
hts
Gold
R
d = 0.4 nm (best fit)
d
x𝓁
rapex
hAu
Gold
F
htip
hbig tip
Figure 5. An overview of the methods used to characterize the geometrical parameters of the two-section EFM tip. (Full
details are presented in SI Appendix, section S2.) (A)-(C) Measurements above a gold sample. (A) The capacitance curvature
∂2C/∂z2 is measured as a function of tip-sample separation hts. Two types of behavior are observed: for small hts, tipsample interactions are affected by both the coarse and fine-tip sections (red data), while for hts > 12.5 nm, interactions are
dominated by just the coarse (“big”) tungsten portion of the tip (purple data). (B) First, COMSOL simulations are used
to characterize the tungsten portion of the tip. For the purple data in (A), simulations are performed as a function of the
tip-sample separation and the big-tip radius R. Minimizing the RMS difference between ∂2C/∂z2 values from the experiments
and simulations (red circle) provides a two-parameter fit, yielding R = 1800 nm. Additional knowledge of the tip-sample
separation hts from SI Appendix, section S1, gives the optimal value for the fine-tip height htip = hbig tip −hts = 23 nm. (C)
Fine-tip parameters are obtained similarly, by comparing experimental data to COMSOL simulations, which now include the
full two-section tip geometry. A fitting procedure gives the optimal relation between the length of the gold coating on the fine
tip hAu and the fine-tip radius rapex. However, since these two parameters have a similar effect on ∂2C/∂z2, we are not able to
determine a globally optimized pair of values (hAu, rapex) from experiments above a gold sample. (D)-(E) Measurements above
an oxide-on-Si sample. Here, we choose an isolated defect with a well-defined charging transition and track this transition
voltage Vb = Vtransition as the tip is scanned both vertically and laterally. (D) Data points (pink markers) show Vtransition as
a function of hts when the tip is placed directly above the defect and scanned vertically. Simulation results (blue curve) are
obtained for a fixed set of parameters (hAu, rapex, d), where d is the unknown depth of the defect below the sample surface,
and the correlated parameters hAu and rapex are taken from (C). d is used as a fitting parameter, here, to provide the best
match between simulations and experiments. The figure shows simulations results for the case rapex = 1 nm. (E) The same
procedure is used for lateral scans passing directly over the defect. Simulations results are again shown for rapex = 1 nm. (F)
Results of the fitting procedure in (D, orange) and (E, blue) showing the best-fit results for d. Since the optimal d value should
be consistent between these two cases, we settle on d = (0.65 ± 0.30) nm as our final optimized result, with corresponding
values for hAu and rapex. Based on these parameter characterizations, the inset shows the resulting conversion between an
experimentally measured charging-transition voltage Vtransition for a given defect, to its corresponding chemical potential ∆,
as discussed in SI Appendix, section S8. Here, the shading indicates the uncertainty.
at a given pixel by analyzing slope discontinuities and
deviations from parabolicity in the CPD curves.
(See
SI Appendix, section S3.) We then apply a Connected
Component Analysis [50, 51] to the resulting transition
maps to identify groups of adjacent pixels whose transition voltages fall within the same narrow voltage window. Although the width of this voltage window is fixed,
its center voltage value is swept continuously, to allow
the capture of all possible transitions. However, we then
need to track the transitions across these shifting windows; to do this, we apply a Spectral Clustering Algorithm [52] to associate groups of pixels with spectral

===== Page 10 =====

10
overlaps, largely eliminating duplicate defect identifications. Unfortunately, this method is unable to distinguish transitions occurring in closely spaced defects of
the same species. We therefore apply a Gaussian Mixture Model Algorithm [53], which enforces a “compactness” (or roundness) metric that splits apart clusters of
pixels that are large and irregularly shaped into smaller,
more-regular clusters. This completes the identification
of individual defects and their charging events.
We next assign charge-transition voltages to the defects. This procedure is complicated by the fact that the
charging process is hysteretic: charging occurs at different tip-bias voltages during forward and backward voltage sweeps. Moreover, different types of hysteresis are
observed in the data (e.g., see SI Appendix, Fig. S26),
suggesting interesting hidden physics that will be explored in future work. Here, we simply note that the hysteresis is minimized at the point of closest tip-defect separation, where the coupling is strongest. To locate this
point, we first note that the tunneling process is stochastic, yielding noisy transition maps like those shown in
Figs. 2D and E, in which the defect centers can be difficult to identify. To mitigate this problem, we apply an
averaging procedure that convolves the data with a gaussian function (see SI Appendix, section S4 D); the center
of the gaussian is identified as the center of the defect.
To minimize the effects of hysteresis, we compare the forward and backward voltage sweeps at this center point.
The f-V curve at this pixel may exhibit many charging transitions, including transitions that originate on
neighboring defects. We must therefore match the corresponding transitions in the forward and backward voltage sweeps; this is done visually, based on similarities in
their jump amplitudes and behavior. (See SI Appendix,
section S7.) Transitions with ambiguous matches are assumed to arise from different defects and are discarded.
By definition, the intrinsic charging voltage contains no
hysteresis, and we approximate it here as the average
of the forward and backward transition voltages for the
pixel at the center of a given defect.
In SI Appendix, section S5, we also apply a second
method to identify defects and locate their center positions, making use of the fact that the transition-voltage
hysteresis is minimized when the EFM tip is centered directly above a defect. Combining these two procedures,
we identify a total of 20 distinct defects in our data set,
as indicated in Fig. 2F.
As a final step of the data analysis, the chargingtransition voltages Vtransition of individual defects are
converted to chemical potentials ∆, like those illustrated
in Figs. 1D and E. As detailed in SI Appendix, section S8,
this is done by comparing the CPD reference potential
(i.e., the globally average CPD, VCPD), representing the
zero-bias condition between the backgate and the tip in
the absence of charged defects, to the charge-transition
voltages found in the previous paragraph. Because the
device is heterogeneous, with several different materials
workfunctions, we relate the Fermi level of the tip to
the chemical potential of the defect through the locally
varying vacuum potential (purple lines in Figs. 3A and
S33). Our calculations make use of two COMSOL simulations: a simulation of the vacuum potential at the globally averaged CPD condition (SI Appendix, section S8)
and a simulation of the lever arm relating the voltage
bias Vb to the shifted electrostatic potential at the location of the defect ∆ϕ(rd) (SI Appendix, section S2 E).
We finally express the defect chemical potential relative
to the valence-band edge, as required for comparisons
with DFT calculations, through knowledge of the electron affinity and the band gap of the Al2O3 oxide. The
final conversion is illustrated in the inset of Fig. 5F.
DFT calculations.
To assist in the identification of
defect species, we use DFT calculations to compute the
stabilities and defect levels for point-defect candidates
in model Al2O3 structures. The defects considered here
include native defects and impurities such as carbon and
hydrogen-containing complexes, with defect formation
energies calculated using a standard supercell approach
with 120-atom supercells for corundum Al2O3 [54]. All
simulations are performed using the HSE06 screened hybrid functional, a plane-wave energy cutoff of 400 eV, and
a Brillouin zone sampling with a 2×2×2 Monkhorst-Pack
k-point density mesh, using VASP version 5.4. [55–57].
A fraction of 32% exact exchange is included in the hybrid functional, giving a band gap of Eg=8.82 eV and the
optimized lattice constants a=4.74 Å and c=12.93 Å for
the corundum structure [55]. Defect formation energies
for charged systems are corrected for finite-size effects using the methodology of Freysoldt, Neugebauer and Van
de Walle, using a static dielectric constant of ϵ = 9.35ϵ0
and 11.4ϵ0 for values perpendicular and parallel to the
c-axis, respectively [54, 58].
We have aligned the measured transition energies to
the DFT-calculated defect transition energies by referencing both to the Al2O3 valence band maximum
(VBM). This is a choice that requires no addition calculations for the DFT defect energies. To align the measured transition energies to the Al2O3 VBM we have
computed the energy difference between the vacuum
level and the Al2O3 VBM via two calculations. First, we
perform a bulk Al2O3 calculation to establish the value
of difference between the Al2O3 VBM and the Al2O3
average electrostatic potential. Second, we perform an
Al2O3 slab calculation to obtain the difference between
the Al2O3 average electrostatic potential and the vacuum potential. The slab calculation assumes four layers
of Al2O3 terminated by OH and 12 Å of vacuum.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. This research was supported by grant #DE-SC0020313, funded by the U.S.
Department of Energy, Office of Science.
The portion of this work performed at Lawrence Livermore Na-

===== Page 11 =====

11
tional Laboratories (LLNL) was completed under Contract DE-AC52-07NA27344. S.N.C. acknowledges useful
conversations with D. L. Blank.
[1] J. Yoneda, K. Takeda, T. Otsuka, T. Nakajima, M. Delbecq, G. Allison, T. Honda, T. Kodera, S. Oda, Y. Hoshi,
N. Usami, K. Itoh, and S. Tarucha. A quantum-dot spin
qubit with coherence limited by charge noise and fidelity
higher than 99.9%. Nature Nanotechnology, 13:102–106,
2018.
[2] A. Seedhouse,
N. Stuyck,
S. Serrano,
T. Tanttu,
W. Gilbert, J. Huang, F. Hudson, K. Itoh, A. Laucht,
W. Lim, C. Yang, A. Dzurak, and A. Saraiva. Spatiotemporal correlations of noise in MOS spin qubits.
arXiv:2309.12542 (2023).
[3] E Connors, JJ Nelson, H. Qiao, L. Edge, and J. Nichol.
Low-frequency charge noise in Si/SiGe quantum dots.
Physical Review B, 100(16):1–12, 2019.
[4] M.Choi, A. Janotti, and C.G. Van de Walle.
Native
point defects and dangling bonds in α −Al2O3. Journal
of Applied Physics, 113(044501), 2013.
[5] A. Holder, K. Osborn, C. Lobb, and C. Musgrave. Bulk
and surface tunneling hydrogen defects in alumina. Physical Review Letters, 111(065901), 2013.
[6] J. Weber, A. Janotti, and C.G. Van de Walle. Native defects in Al2O3 and their impact on III −V/Al2O3 metaloxide-semiconductor-based devices. Journal of Applied
Physics, 109(033715), 2011.
[7] W. Goes and T. Grasser. Charging and discharging of
oxide defects in reliability issues. IEEE Transactions on
Device and Materials Reliability, 8(3):491–500, 2008.
[8] Filip Tuomisto. Characterisation and Control of Defects
in Semiconductors. Institution of engineering and technology, 2019.
[9] D.V. Lang. Deep-level transient spectroscopy: A new
method to characterize traps in semiconductors. Journal
of Applied Physics, 45(7):3023–3032, 1974.
[10] F. Tuomisto and I. Makkonen. Defect identification in
semiconductors with positron annihilation: Experiment
and theory. Rev. Mod. Phys., 85:1583–1631, 2013.
[11] T. Grasser, H. Reisinger, P. Wagner, and B. Kaczar.
Time-dependent defect spectroscopy for characterization
of border traps in metal-oxide-semiconductor transistors.
Phys. Rev. B, 82:245318, 2010.
[12] Gr W Ludwig and HH Woodbury.
Electron spin resonance in semiconductors. In Solid State Physics, volume 13, pages 223–304. Elsevier, 1962.
[13] Edward H Poindexter and Philip J Caplan.
Characterization of Si/SiO2 interface defects by electron spin
resonance.
Progress in surface science, 14(3):201–294,
1983.
[14] Russell A McLellan, Aveek Dutta, Chenyu Zhou, Yichen
Jia, Conan Weiland, Xin Gui, Alexander PM Place,
Kevin D Crowley, Xuan Hoang Le, Trisha Madhavan,
et al.
Chemical profiles of the oxides on tantalum in
state of the art superconducting circuits. Advanced Science, 10(21):2300921, 2023.
[15] F
Ishikawa,
S
Fuyuno,
K
Higashi,
M
Kondow,
M Machida, H Oji, J-Y Son, A Trampert, K Umeno,
Y Furukawa, et al.
Direct observation of n-(group v)
bonding defects in dilute nitride semiconductors using
hard x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. Applied Physics
Letters, 98(12), 2011.
[16] G. Bersuker J.Price and P. Lysaght.
Identification of
electrically active defects in thin dielectric films by spectroscopic ellipsometry. Journal of Applied Physics, 111,
2012.
[17] M. Zahid, A. Arreghini, R. Degraeve, B. Govoreanu,
A. Suhane, and J. Houdt. Electron trap profiling near
Al2O3/gate interface in TANOS stack using gate-side
trap spectroscopy by charge injection and sensing. IEEE
Electron Device Letters, 31(10):1158–1160, 2010.
[18] J Stephen Brugler and Paul GA Jespers. Charge pumping in MOS devices.
IEEE Transactions on Electron
Devices, 16(3):297–302, 1969.
[19] Masahiro Hori and Yukinori Ono. Charge pumping under spin resonance in si (100) metal-oxide-semiconductor
transistors. Physical Review Applied, 11(6):064064, 2019.
[20] Toshiaki Tsuchiya. Detection and characterization of single defects in mosfets. In Noise in Nanoscale Semiconductor Devices, pages 359–415. Springer, 2020.
[21] R. Ludeke and E. Cartier. Imaging of trapped charge in
SiO2 and at the SiO2 −Si interface. Appl. Phys. Lett.,
78(25):3998–4000, 2001.
[22] Y Suganuma, P-E Trudeau, and A-A Dhirani.
Probing correlated current and force effects of nanoparticle
charge states by hybrid STM-AFM. Physical Review B,
66(24):241405, 2002.
[23] E Bussmann, N Zheng, and CC Williams. Single-electron
manipulation to and from a SiO2 surface by electrostatic
force microscopy. Applied Physics Letters, 86(16), 2005.
[24] Aykutlu Dana and Yoshihisa Yamamoto. Electrostatic
force spectroscopy of near surface localized states. Nanotechnology, 16(3):S125, 2005.
[25] Romain
Stomp,
Yoichi
Miyahara,
Sacha
Schaer,
Qingfeng Sun, Hong Guo, Peter Grutter, Sergei Studenikin, Philip Poole, and Andy Sachrajda. Detection
of single-electron charging in an individual inas quantum
dot by noncontact atomic-force microscopy. Physical review letters, 94(5):056802, 2005.
[26] J Zhu, M Brink, and PL McEuen. Frequency shift imaging of quantum dots with single-electron resolution. Applied Physics Letters, 87(24), 2005.
[27] R.
Ludeke
and
E.
Gusev.
Structural
and
surface potential characterization of annealed HfO2 and
(HfO2)x(SiO2)1−x films.
Journal of Applied Physics,
96(4):2365–2373, 2004.
[28] L. Patera, F. Queck, P. Scheuerer, and J. Repp. Mapping
orbital changes upon electron transfer with tunnelling
microscopy on insulators. Nature, 566:1, 2019.
[29] N. Kocić, P. Weiderer, S. Keller, S. Decurtins, S. Liu,
and J. Repp. Periodic charging of individual molecules
coupled to the motion of an atomic force microscopy tip.
Nano Lett., 15(7):4406–4411, 2015.

===== Page 12 =====

12
[30] L. Gross, F. Mohn, P. Liljeroth, J. Repp, F. Giessibl, and
G. Meyer. Measuring the charge state of an adatom with
noncontact atomic force microscopy. Science, 324:1428–
1431, 2009.
[31] E. Bussmann and C.C. Williams. Single-electron tunneling force spectroscopy of an individual electronic state
in a nonconducting surface.
Applied Physics Letters,
88:263108, 2006.
[32] Wolfram Steurer, Shadi Fatayer, Leo Gross, and Gerhard Meyer. Probe-based measurement of lateral singleelectron transfer between individual molecules. Nature
Communications, 6(1):8353, 2015.
[33] Shadi Fatayer, Bruno Schuler, Wolfram Steurer, Ivan
Scivetti, Jascha Repp, Leo Gross, Mats Persson, and
Gerhard Meyer. Reorganization energy upon charging
a single molecule on an insulator measured by atomic
force microscopy. Nature nanotechnology, 13(5):376–380,
2018.
[34] Thomas König, Georg H Simon, Lars Heinke, Leonid
Lichtenstein, and Markus Heyde. Defects in oxide surfaces studied by atomic force and scanning tunneling microscopy. Beilstein journal of nanotechnology, 2(1):1–14,
2011.
[35] JP Johnson, N Zheng, and CC Williams. Atomic scale
imaging and spectroscopy of individual electron trap
states using force detected dynamic tunnelling.
Nanotechnology, 20(5):055701, 2009.
[36] Yasuo Azuma, Masayuki Kanehara, Toshiharu Teranishi, and Yutaka Majima. Single electron on a nanodot
in a double-barrier tunneling structure observed by noncontact atomic-force spectroscopy. Physical Review Letters, 96(1):016108, 2006.
[37] N Zheng, JP Johnson, CC Williams, and G Wang.
Electronic characterization of individual monolayer protected au clusters by single electron tunneling force spectroscopy. Nanotechnology, 21(29):295708, 2010.
[38] Megan Cowie, Procopios C Constantinou, Neil J Curson, Taylor JZ Stock, and Peter Grutter. Spatially resolved random telegraph fluctuations of a single trap at
the Si/SiO2 interface. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.07251,
2024.
[39] Megan Cowie, Taylor JZ Stock, Procopios C Constantinou, Neil J Curson, and Peter Grütter. Spatially resolved
dielectric loss at the Si/SiO2 interface. Physical Review
Letters, 132(25):256202, 2024.
[40] Y Suganuma, P-E Trudeau, and A-A Dhirani.
Probing correlated current and force effects of nanoparticle
charge states by hybrid STM-AFM. Physical Review B,
66(24):241405, 2002.
[41] Y Naitou, A Ando, H Ogiso, S Kamiyama, Y Nara,
K Yasutake, and H Watanabe.
Investigation of local charged defects within high-temperature annealed
HfSiON/SiO2 gate stacks by scanning capacitance spectroscopy. Journal of applied physics, 101(8), 2007.
[42] Shin’ichi Kitamura, Kazunori Yonei, Masashi Iwatsuki,
C. B. Mooney, and Yasuo Fukuda.
Mapping contact
potential differences with noncontact atomic force microscope using resonance frequency shift versus sample
bias voltage curves. Japanese Journal of Applied Physics,
44(11R):8113, nov 2005.
[43] J. Neff and P. Rahe. Insights into Kelvin probe force
microscopy data of insulator-supported molecules. Phys.
Rev. B, 91(8):085424, 2015.
[44] T. Glatzel Y. Rosenwaks, R. Shikler and S. Sadewasser.
Kelvin probe force microscopy of semiconductor surface
defects. Physical Review B, 70(8):1–7, 2004.
[45] W.
Behn,
Z.
Krebs,
K.
Smith,
K.
Watanabe,
T. Taniguchi, and V. W. Brar. Measuring and tuning
the potential landscape of electrostatically defined quantum dots in graphene. Nano Letters, 21(12):5013–5020,
2021.
[46] M.A. Wolfe, Brighton X. Coe, Justin S. Edwards,
Tyler J. Kovach, Thomas McJunkin, Benjamin Harpt,
D.E. Savage,
M.G. Lagally,
R. McDermott,
Mark
Friesen, Shimon Kolkowitz, and M.A. Eriksson. Control
of threshold voltages in Si/Si0.7Ge0.3 quantum devices
via optical illumination.
Phys. Rev. Appl., 22:034044,
Sep 2024.
[47] Thomas V. Perneger.
How to use likelihood ratios to
interpret evidence from randomized trials.
Journal of
Clinical Epidemiology, 136:235–242, 2021.
[48] Y. Zhang, D. Seghete, A. Abdulagatov, Z.Gibbs, A. Cavanagh, R. Yang, S. George, and Y. Lee. Investigation of
the defect density in ultra-thin Al2O3 films grown using
atomic layer deposition. Surface and Coatings Technology, 205(10):3334–3339, 2011.
[49] M. J. Cyster, J. S. Smith, J. A. Vaitkus, N. Vogt, S. P.
Russo, and J. H. Cole. Effect of atomic structure on the
electrical response of aluminum oxide tunnel junctions.
Phys. Rev. Res., 2:013110, Jan 2020.
[50] G. Bradski. The OpenCV Library. Dr. Dobb’s Journal
of Software Tools, 2000.
[51] L. Shapiro.
Connected component labeling and adjacency graph construction.
Topological Algorithms for
Digital Image Processing, 19:1–30, 1996.
[52] Michael Jordan Andrew Ng and Yair Weiss. On spectral clustering: Analysis and an algorithm. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 14,
2001.
[53] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel,
B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer,
R. Weiss,
V. Dubourg,
J. Vanderplas,
A. Passos,
D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and E. Duchesnay. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in python. Journal
of Machine Learning Research, 12:2825–2830, 2011.
[54] Christoph Freysoldt, Blazej Grabowski, Tilmann Hickel,
Jörg Neugebauer, Georg Kresse, Anderson Janotti, and
Chris G. Van de Walle. First-principles calculations for
point defects in solids.
Rev. Mod. Phys., 86:253–305,
Mar 2014.
[55] Jochen Heyd, Gustavo E. Scuseria, and Matthias Ernzerhof. Hybrid functionals based on a screened coulomb potential. The Journal of Chemical Physics, 118(18):8207–
8215, 05 2003.
[56] G. Kresse and J. Furthmüller.
Efficiency of ab-initio
total energy calculations for metals and semiconductors
using a plane-wave basis set. Computational Materials
Science, 6(1):15–50, 1996.
[57] M Marsman, J Paier, A Stroppa, and G Kresse.
Hybrid functionals applied to extended systems. Journal of
Physics: Condensed Matter, 20(6):064201, jan 2008.
[58] Christoph Freysoldt, Jörg Neugebauer, and Chris G.

===== Page 13 =====

13
Van de Walle. Fully ab initio finite-size corrections for
charged-defect supercell calculations. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
102:016402, Jan 2009.
[59] J. Sader and S. Jarvis. Accurate formulas for interaction force and energy in frequency modulation force spectroscopy. Applied Physics Letters, 84(10):1801, 2004.
[60] Wolfgang MH Sachtler, GJH Dorgelo, and AA Holscher.
The work function of gold. Surface Science, 5(2):221–
229, 1966.
[61] W. Haynes. CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics.
CRC Press, 2016.
[62] S. Fatayer, B. Schuler, W. Steurer, I. Scivetti, J. Repp,
L. Gross, M. Persson, and G. Meyer.
Reorganization
energy upon charging a single molecule on an insulator
measured by atomic force microscopy. Nature Nanotechnology, 13:376–380, 2018.

===== Page 14 =====

14
SI APPENDICES FOR “A SCANNING PROBE MICROSCOPY APPROACH FOR IDENTIFYING
DEFECTS IN ALUMINUM OXIDE”
In these Appendices, we provide details for the methods and calculations described in the main text.
S1.
DETERMINING THE ABSOLUTE SEPARATION hts BETWEEN THE OXIDE SAMPLE AND
THE EFM TIP
The tip-sample separation hts is a key parameter in all EFM experiments. Unfortunately, without crashing the
tip into the sample (an undesirable occurrence), it is not possible to directly determine this parameter. Here, we
describe an alternative method for determining hts.
We make use of the fact that tip-sample interactions are strongly repulsive in the absence of electrostatic effects [59]
We therefore perform EFM measurements as a function of tip height, while tuning the backgate to its Contact
Potential Difference (CPD) bias, causing the tip-sample interactions to vanish. The resonant frequency shift of the
tip ∆f is then measured as a function of tip height, while maintaining the CPD condition, yielding the results shown
in Fig. S1(a). At this point, we do not know the absolute tip-sample separation, only the relative separation. In
the limit of small-amplitude oscillations, as appropriate for this experiment, the frequency shift ∆f is proportional
to the tip-sample force gradient ∂fts/∂z. Figure S1(a) therefore provides a direct measurement of the tip-sample
interaction, showing behavior consistent with a Lennard-Jones potential: a steep short-range repulsive interaction
crossing over to a gradually decreasing attractive interaction at larger distances. While the expected behavior of
the Lennard-Jones potential diverges for small tip-sample separations, extrapolating the curve to ∆f = 0, as shown
in Fig. S1(b), gives a good approximation for hts [59], with small errors on the order of ∆hts ≈0.1 nm. A simple
horizontal shift of the data, as shown in Fig. S1(c), therefore provides the desired calibration of the interaction curve.
Relative tip-sample 
separation (nm)
∆f (Hz)
Relative tip-sample 
separation (nm)
hts (nm)
c
∆f (Hz)
∆f (Hz)
b
a
Extrapolated
Data
Extrapolated and shifted
Shifted data
Data
Figure S1.
Calibrating the tip-sample interaction curve. (a) Shifts in the EFM resonant frequency ∆f are measured while
maintaining the CPD condition, as a function of tip height. For small oscillation amplitudes, this curve provides a good
estimate for the tip-sample interaction; however, the absolute value of the tip-sample separation hts remains to be calibrated.
(b) Due to the initial steepness of the interaction curve, its extrapolated crossing with the ∆f = 0 line should occur very near
hts = 0, providing the desired calibration. (c) Calibration is achieved by shifting the data horizontally, so the extrapolated
curve passes through the origin.

===== Page 15 =====

15
hts (nm)
Δf (Hz)
Vb (V)
Δf (Hz)
1
0
0.5
0
-5
-10
-15
hts = 
0.56 nm
Figure S2.
Determining hts for an arbitrary tip height, using the calibrated ∆f-hts curve from Fig.S1(c) (also reproduced in
the inset, here). The main panel shows an f-V voltage sweep obtained at this tip setting. The ∆f value at the CPD condition
is given by the dashed green line. The inset shows the same CPD condition (horizontal dashed green line), and its crossing
point on the calibrated interaction curve (vertical dashed blue curve), indicating hts for these experimental conditions.
Based on Fig. S1(c), we may now estimate hts for any experiment, as follows. For a given EFM tuning, we identify
the CPD condition in an f-V curve, as indicated by the green dashed line in the main panel of Fig. S2. Since typical
EFM measurements are performed at larger tip-sample separations hts ≳0.5 nm, we focus in the right-hand side of
the calibrated interaction curve, which is reproduced in the inset of Fig. S2. We can then read hts directly off of the
curve: here, the horizontal dashed green line represents the measured CPD value and the vertical dashed blue line
represents the estimated hts value for this EFM setting.
S2.
CHARACTERIZING THE TIP GEOMETRY
As noted in Fig. 3B of the main text, we model our EFM tip in two sections, with a fine tip attached to a
bulk or “big” tip, as illustrated again in Fig. S3. The various parameters of the tip are labeled in Fig. S3(a) and
the parabolic parameters used in the simulations are indicated in Fig. S3(b), similar to the model described in
Ref. [45]. To perform accurate simulations of the full system, including the sample, we need to first characterize
the tip parameters, including the big tip radius R, the fine tip height htip, the fine tip radius rapex, and the height
of gold coating on the fine tip hAu. Our first set of EFM measurements, described below, is performed on a gold
sample. This is practical and convenient, because gold’s work function is well known, which simplifies our procedure.
Additional calibration steps are then performed on an oxide sample containing a defect, as explained below. All
simulations of the tip-sample system are performed using COMSOL software, assuming a 2D axisymmetric geometry
for the tip. The key physical quantity allowing us to make contact between the experiments and the simulations is
the tip-sample capacitance C, and specifically, the second derivative of C with respect to the tip-sample separation.
A.
Determining ∂2C/∂z2 from experiments and using it to determine work functions
The second derivative of the tip-sample capacitance can be related to variations of the tip resonance frequency,
∆f through the equation [43]
∆f = −f0
2k0
∂Fel
∂z
= −f0
4k0
∂2C
∂z2 V 2
eff.
(S1)
Here, Fel is the tip-sample electrostatic force, f0 = 2865 Hz is the free resonant frequency of the oscillating tip
(i.e., far away from the sample), k0 = 1800 Nm−1 is the spring constant of the oscillating tip, C is the tip-sample
capacitance in the absence of any charges inside the sample (motivating our use of a gold sample, since this does
not contain any charged defects), and z is the tip height. For simple tip geometries, Veff = Vb −∆W/e, where Vb
is the bias between the tip and the sample, and ∆W is their work function difference. We therefore expect the
frequency variations of the tip to show a quadratic dependence on the tip-sample bias, Vb. This is indeed observed

===== Page 16 =====

16
a
b
𝑧= ℎtip +
ℎts +
𝑥2
𝑅 
𝑧= ℎts +
𝑥2
𝑟apex 
htip
2rapex
hAu
hts
d
R
Distance from tip center (nm)
Height above sample (nm)
Figure S3.
Two-section model for the EFM tip. (a) A wide view (right) and a blown-up view (left) of the tip, showing the
various model parameters. (Reproduced from Fig. 3B of the main text.) (b) The parabolic geometry parameters used to
model the tip shape in the simulations of Sec. S2 and the rest of this paper. Here, R is the radius of the bulk or “big” tip and
rapex is the radius of the fine tip.
in our experimental measurements, as seen in Fig. S4(a), for several tip-sample separations hts. Here, ∂2C/∂z2
characterizes the curvature of the f-V curves, and has a strong dependence on tip-sample separation, as seen in
Fig. S4(b).
In our experiment, the work function of the tip is more complicated because the bulk portion of the tip is formed
of tungsten, while the fine portion of the tip has a coating of gold at the end of the tip.
As noted above, the
gold portion of the tip has a well-characterized work function with a value of 5.30 eV [60]. To characterize the full
tip, we consider the Vb scans shown in Fig. S4(a). As the tip-sample separation increases, the effective (total) tip
work function changes, approaching the value for the bulk tungsten portion of the tip for the largest tip-sample
separations. To characterize this changing behavior, we analyze here the CPD condition (∂∆f/∂Vb = 0), which
describes the tip-sample bias that exactly offsets the work function difference, causing tip-sample interactions to
vanish. In Fig. S4(a), this condition is met at the maxima of the individual parabolas. Importantly, we see that the
CPD bias Vb = VCPD changes as a function of tip-sample separation. To extract the CPD values for each curve, we
fit the experimental data to an inverted parabola of the form ∆f = aV 2
b + bVb + c. The CPD bias is then given by
Vb = VCPD = −b/2a.
In the limit where the tip is far from the sample, we expect that its work function will be dominated by the bulk
tungsten rather than the small amount of gold at the end of the fine tip. In our experiments, the largest tip-sample
separation is given by 52.5 nm, as calibrated in Sec. S1 above. At this separation we obtain VCPD = 0.92 ± 0.10 V,
Tip-sample separation, hts (nm)
𝜕2𝐶 /𝜕𝑧2 (F/m2)
∆f (Hz)
Tip-Gold Bias (V)
a
b
Figure S4.
Determining ∂2C/∂z2 from experiments.
(a) Experimental measurements of variations of the tip resonance
frequency ∆f as a function of the voltage bias Vb between the tip and a gold sample for four different tip-sample separations
hts, as indicated. These frequency variations are converted to capacitance curvature ∂2C/∂z2 using Eq. (S1). (b) Results for
∂2C/∂z2 are shown as a function of hts.

===== Page 17 =====

17
as shown in Fig. S5. Taking into account the work function of the gold sample, the relation ∆W = eVCPD then
predicts a work function for the tungsten tip of 4.38 ± 0.10 eV. This should be compared to the quoted value of
4.55 eV [61], which is not as well known as gold. In our case, the small amount of gold on the EFM tip contributes
some uncertainty to our estimate. Additionally, at the largest tip-sample separations applied in our experiments, the
asymptotic behavior of the CPD values may not be fully realized, as apparent in Fig. S5. However, this represents
our best estimate for the tungsten work function, and we adopt the tungsten work function value of WW = 4.38±0.10
eV in the remainder of this work. Note that the uncertainty of the parabolic fits at different tip-sample separations
were used to estimate the uncertainty of the CPD. From the discussion of the parabolic fits, we therefore define the
CPD error, arising from the fitting procedure, to be ∆VCPD =
 b
2a

q
( ∆a
a )2 + ( ∆b
b )2. Here, we have combined the
separate error contributions in quadrature, and we have also included variations in the fitting results obtained from
forward and backward voltage sweeps.
For measurements performed on our oxide sample, we also need to account for the work function of the molybdenum
backgate, especially since the reported values for molybdenum are somewhat variable or uncertain, ranging in the
literature from 4.36 to 4.95 eV [61]. In our experiments, we also face uncertainties arising from the fact that the
presence of charged defects in the oxide affects the accuracy of Eq. (S1). To address this issue, we assume that the
charge state of the defects at the CPD condition is neutral, on average, despite displaying local variations. (Also,
see the discussion in Sec. S6 A, below.) We therefore map out VCPD across a scan region of 25 × 25 nm2, using the
parabolic fitting method described above, to obtain the average value of VCPD = −0.25 V. Using this result, we then
obtain a work function value of WMo = 4.63 eV for our molybdenum backgate.
B.
Determining ∂2C/∂z2 from simulations
The tip parameters discussed in the following subsections are determined by comparing experimental and simulation
results for ∂2C/∂z2, where the latter are calculated for the model geometry of Fig. S3(b). The experimental methods
for finding ∂2C/∂z2 are described in the previous subsection. For the simulations, we employ a standard technique
in which the tip-sample voltage bias is set to Vb = 1 V, and Laplace’s equation is solved numerically to determine
the induced charge density on the gold sample surface. Integrating this density to obtain the total charge Q give the
capacitance from the equation C = Q/Vb. All simulations here include the full tip geometry and appropriate work
functions. The simulations are repeated as a function of tip height z, giving C(z), and the results are fitted to a
5th-degree B-spline, from which we compute the second derivative to finally give ∂2C/∂z2. The system size and the
discrete step size ∆z are both checked for convergence.
hts (nm)
VCPD (V)
hts
Figure S5.
Experimental determination of the CPD voltage bias VCPD as a function of the tip-sample separation. Spatial
variations arise in part from the fact that the tip is inhomogeneous, containing both gold and tungsten materials. Tip-sample
interactions are dominated by the big (tungsten) portion of the tip for large hts values, yielding the estimate for the tungsten
work function used in this work: WW = 4.38 ± 0.10 eV.

===== Page 18 =====

18
Big tip only
Complete tip
Figure S6.
Simulation results for the capacitance curvature vs tip-sample separation for two different tip geometries. For
the “complete tip,” we consider the two-section geometry illustrated in Fig. S3(b). Here we use the parameters R = 1800 nm,
htip = 22.8 nm, hAu = 0.5 nm, and rapex = 1.5 nm. We define the tip-sample separation to be hts = 0 when the tip touches
the gold sample. The “big tip” simulation follows the same procedure, but with the fine-tip removed from the model geometry.
The two simulations agree well for h ≳10 nm, with residual errors on the order of 1-2% when the Complete tip is simply
replaced by the Big tip.
C.
Determining the big tip radius R and the fine tip height htip
Figure S6 shows typical simulation results for ∂2C/∂z2 as a function of hts. Here, the orange curve corresponds
to the “complete” solution (big tip and fine tip), while the blue curve shows the solution where we include just
the big tip, but we exclude the fine tip. We see that the two solutions converge for large enough hts values, as
expected, since the bulk tip dominates over the much smaller fine tip in this limit. It is clear that the big tip and
fine tip offer separate contributions to the total tip-sample capacitance. We can observe similar behavior in the
experimental data in Fig. S7(a), where the results are plotted on a logarithmic scale. Here, two distinct power-law
behaviors are observed, with the red data dominated by the fine tip and the purple data dominated by the big tip.
A well-demarcated crossover occurs at hts ≈12.5 nm.
Since the purple data are dominated by the big tip, we can use this subset of data to characterize the big-tip
radius R and the separation hbig tip between the sample and the big tip, as illustrated in Fig. S7(b). For simplicity,
we remove the fine tip and perform simulations of just the big tip. Typical simulation results are plotted in S8(a) as
Log10 hts
Log10 (𝜕2𝐶 /𝜕𝑧2)
htip (unknown)
hts (known)
hbig tip
b
Au
z
R
a
Figure S7.
Log-log plot of the experimentally measured capacitance curvature vs tip-sample separation above a gold sample.
(a) The data indicate two distinct types of behavior reflected in different power laws, where the red data are affected by
interactions between the sample and the full tip, while the purple data are dominated by interactions between the sample and
the big tip only. The crossover between these two regimes occurs at hts ≈12.5 nm. (b) Illustration of the system parameters
relevant for analyzing the purple data in (a). The fine tip length htip is originally unknown and must be determined from the
analysis.

===== Page 19 =====

19
hbig tip (nm)
hbig tip (nm)
a
b
𝜕2𝐶 /𝜕𝑧2 (F/m2)
𝜕2𝐶 /𝜕𝑧2 (F/m2)
htip
htip
Fits of data
Simulation
Simulation
Fit of data
Figure S8.
Fitting procedure to determine the best value of htip for a given R. (a) Experimental measurements of the
capacitance curvature as a function of the separation hbig tip between the big tip and the sample, illustrated in Fig. S7(b),
for several values of the unknown parameter htip (blue, orange, gray curves). Simulation results are also shown, assuming a
big-tip radius of R = 1800 nm (red curve, “Simulation”). (b) For this value of R, the best match between simulations and
experiments is given by htip = 22.8 nm.
a function of hbig tip (red curve), for a fixed value of R = 1800 nm. We also replot the purple experimental data of
Fig. S7(a) here, although we do not know the absolute value of hbig tip yet. (Recall that we calibrated the tip-sample
separation hts in Sec. S1; however, we have not yet determined the length of the fine tip, htip = hbig tip −hts.) Thus,
determining the unknown parameter htip would also allow us to calibrate the absolute value of hbig tip. For example,
the three values of htip considered in Fig. S8(a) cause horizontal shifts in the data as shown. The optimal value value
of htip should be determined by matching the experimental and simulation results, as in Fig. S8(b).
While the parameter htip mainly affects the horizontal shift of the data in Fig. S8(a), the shape of the curve is
more strongly affected by the remaining big-tip parameter R. We therefore perform a simultaneous fitting of the
parameters htip and R. Specifically, we repeat the fitting procedure demonsstrated in Fig. S8(b) for many different
R values, obtaining the results shown in Fig. S9 for the optimal correspondence between htip and R. As noted above,
the main point of comparison between simulations and experiment is through the capacitance curvature. Hence, the
quality of each point in Fig. S9(b) can be quantified by the root-mean-square (RMS) comparison of the experimental
and simulational capacitance curvatures, giving the results shown in Fig. S9(c). Choosing the value with minimum
error, we obtain the fully optimized results htip = (22.8 ± 2.1) nm and R = (1800 ± 200) nm. Here, we have defined
the uncertainty for R as the threshold value in Fig. S9(c) for which the RMS value is 25% above its minimum value.
We then convert this to an uncertainty in htip via the slope shown in Fig. S9(b).
Big Tip Radius, R (nm)
Best fit htip
Big Tip Radius, R (nm)
Root mean squared error in 
𝜕2𝐶
𝜕2𝑧
b
c
R
htip + hts
a
Figure S9.
Simultaneous fitting procedure for the tip parameters R and htip.
(a) The simulation geometry.
[See also
Fig. S7(b).] Note that hts was determined in Sec. S1. (b) Best-fit results for htip, for a range of R values, following the
procedure described in Fig. S8(b). (c) RMS deviations between the simulationaal and experimental data is shown for each of
the points in (b). The optimal value, R = 1800 nm, is obtained at the minimum RMS value. We define the uncertainty of
this calculation to be the RMS threshold occurring 25% above the minimum value: R = (1800 ± 200) nm. The corresponding
error in htip is determined from the slope in (b): htip = (22.8 ± 2.1) nm.

===== Page 20 =====

20
Fine tip radius, rapex (nm)
Best fit hAu (nm)
Fine tip radius, rapex (nm)
RMS error in 𝜕2𝐶 /𝜕𝑧2 (F/m2)
Tip-sample separation, hts (nm)
𝜕2𝐶 /𝜕𝑧2 (F/m2)
a
b
c
d
rapex
hAu
Figure S10.
Simultaneous fitting procedure for the fine-tip parameters rapex and hAu, illustrated in (a).
(b) Setting
rapex = 1 nm, hAu is taken as a fitting parameter in the simulations of the capacitance curvature as a function fo hts (blue
curve) to obtain the best match to the experimental data (red points). (c) This fitting procedure is repeated for different
rapex values. (d) The RMS errors of the fits are shown for each point in (c). These results point towards an optimal value of
rapex < 1 nm, which appears unphysical, suggesting that we develop an alternative fitting procedure.
D.
Determining the fine tip radius rapex and the height of the gold coating on the tip hAu
To determine rapex and hAu, we consider the red data subset in Fig. S7, and the two-section parabolic tip model
shown in Figs. S10(a). We first try to perform simultaneous fits for these two parameters by comparing simulations
and experiments, similar to the approach used in the previous subsection. For example, Fig. S10(b) shows experimentally determined capacitance curvature (red points), compared to simulation results (blue curve) obtained for a
fixed value of rapex, with hAu taken as a fitting parameter. This procedure is repeated for different values of rapex in
Fig. S10(c), with corresponding RMS estimates shown in Fig. S10(d). Here we see that the best result is obtained at
the boundary value rapex = 1 nm, suggesting that the actual optimum occurs at even smaller values of rapex, with a
corresponding value of hAu →0. Unfortunately, simulations with vanishing rapex are not physically reasonable, since
we know the tip has some amount of gold, suggesting some type of ambiguity in our simulations, in this limit. We
therefore explore an alternative simulation approach, to supplement the results shown in Fig. S10.
A partial explanation for the challenges encountered in Fig. S10 is that the parameters rapex and hAu have a similar
effect on ∂2C/∂z2 when they are varied. The gold sample in this experiment has a smooth, uniform surface that
exacerbates the problem. We therefore consider a different sample – the oxide-on-Si sample that forms the focus of
this work – because it exhibits lateral inhomogeneity, due to localized charged defects. The most distinctive property
of a defect, which we study in this work, is its charging transition — specifically, the tip-backgate bias Vtransition
that induces the transition. However, adding defects to the analysis also means we need to include another new
parameter in our simulations: the depth d of the defect below the surface of the oxide. We now describe the new
fitting procedure.
From our experimental measurements, we choose a single defect with a well-defined charging transition that can be
tracked as the EFM tip is scanned both vertically and laterally across the sample. At each tip location, we record the
transition voltage Vtransition of the lowest charging transition within the experimental voltage range; these are shown

===== Page 21 =====

21
Distance along linecut (nm)
Defect depth, d (nm)
Tip-sample separation, hts (nm)
RMS error (V)
RMS error (V)
Defect depth, d (nm)
Vtransition (V)
Vtransition (V)
a
b
c
d
0.4 nm
0.3 nm
Figure S11.
Fitting procedure for identifying optimized triplets of parameters (d, hAu, rapex), given the pre-optimized pairs of
parameters (hAu, rapex) obtained in Fig. S10(c). (a) Charging transition voltages obtained along a lateral EFM scan directly
over a defect, as a function of position (red circles). Simulation-based estimates for Vtransition for the same tip locations,
following the procedure described in the main text, for a given set of parameters (d, hAu, rapex). RMS values between the
experimental data and the simulations are minimized to determine the optimal value of d corresponding to the values of
(hAu, rapex) used in the simulations. (b) This optimization procedure is repeated for different values of d, yielding the RMS
values shown here. The dashed horizontal line represents about 10% of the maximum RMS values, measured from the minimum
RMS value. The results in (a) are obtained for d = 0.4 nm, with a corresponding uncertainty of 0.2 nm. (c), (d) Here, we
show the same type of results as (a) and (b) for the case of a vertical EFM scan, where the minimum tip-sample separation
corresponds to the tip location at the center of the lateral scan in (a), which is directly above the defect. The results in (c)
are obtained for d = 0.3 nm, with a corresponding uncertainty of 0.1 nm.
as red points in Figs. S11(a) (horizontal scan) and S11(c) (vertical scan). Here, each data point Vtransition describes
the average value of the charge-transition voltages obtained in the forward and backward voltage sweeps, taken over
several measurements. The error bars describe the standard deviation of these measurements, with relatively large
values reflecting the stochastic nature of the tunneling process. The two scans (vertical and lateral) overlap at the
point of closest separation between the tip and the defect. As expected from the simulations described below, the
charging-transition voltage takes its maximum value at this location, with Vtransition ≈3.6 V, and decreases for larger
tip-defect separations.
Simulations are then used to fit the experimental data in these vertical and lateral scans. We assume the two-section
tip model defined in Fig. S3. Optimized pairs of parameters (hAu, rapex) were previously obtained in Fig. S10(c),
and we consider one of these pairs, and one value of the defect depth d. The goal of the simulations is to choose the
optimal values for these parameters.
We first consider the common point in the vertical and lateral scans – the point of closest separation between the
tip and defect. We perform a simulation of the tip-sample system, using the experimentally determined value of
Vb = Vtransition at that tip location. The output of interest from the simulation is the electrostatic potential measured
at the location of the defect ϕ(rd), which we use as a proxy for the value of the chemical potential for the charging
transition. We then consider other positions of the tip along the vertical and lateral scans. At each tip location,
we use simulations to determine the value of Vb that gives the same value of ϕ(rd), since this corresponds to the
modified value of the gate bias that gives the same chemical potential that causes a charging transition. Repeating
this procedure for every tip position gives a theoretical prediction for Vtransition as a function of position along the

===== Page 22 =====

22
Fine tip radius, rapex (nm)
Best fit defect depth, d (nm)
Agree on d
Figure S12. Joint fits for the defect depth d, obtained from the lateral and vertical scans described in the main text and in
Fig. S11. The error bars shown here are determined in Figs. S11(b) and (d). Since the scans are performed above the same
defect, self-consistency requires that they should give the same answer, yielding the optimal values indicated by red circles.
We thus obtain best fit results given by rapex = (1.5 ± 0.5) nm and d = (0.65 ± 0.30) nm.
scan, which can be compared to the experimental data, as shown in Figs. S11(a) and (c) (blue line). The RMS
value describing the difference between the experimental data and the theoretical fit is then computed. This whole
procedure is repeated for the same value of d, while choosing new values of the correlated (hAu, rapex) pair. In this
way, we identify the (hAu, rapex) pair that minimizes the RMS for a given d, yielding optimized triplets of parameter
values (d, hAu, rapex).
We now repeat this whole procedure for different values of d, yielding slightly different results for the lateral scan
vs the vertical scan, as shown in Figs. S11(b) and (d). This method provides estimates for the uncertainty in our
optimization procedure, as defined by the horizontal dashed lines in the figure panels, corresponding to about 10%
of the largest reported RMS value, measured from the minimum RMS value. However, the optimal values of d do
not necessarily match for the lateral and vertical scans, as observed in Fig. S12. We therefore insist that the values
of d should match, because they arise from the same defect. The last step in the procedure is therefore to identify
points of overlap in these two curves, as indicated here by red circles. We accept the average of these data points as
our overall optimized value for the (d, hAu, rapex) triplet, giving the final results for our fitting procedure, which are
given by d = (0.65 ± 0.30) nm, rapex = (1.5 ± 0.5) nm, and hAu = (0.5 ± 0.4) nm.
As a final comment, we note that this technique also provides an estimate for the defect depth d = (0.65±0.30) nm.
We emphasize that this amounts to a very laborious scheme for finding d, which we do not repeat for every defect.
However, the final result corroborates our intuition that defect charging transitions, induced by electrons tunneling
to or from the EFM tip, can only occur when defects are situated very near the surface.
E.
Determining the tip-defect lever arm αd and the charging transition voltage Vtransition as a function of
tip position
The tip-defect lever arm αd describes the capacitive interaction between the tip and a defect, and plays an important
role in determining the defect’s charge-transition voltages Vtransition. αd clearly depends on the tip location, relative to
the defect, and must therefore be re-computed for every new tip-defect configuration. For example, in the preceding
subsections, we considered lateral and vertical scans over a defect, for which the lever arm varies with the tip position.
To compute the lever arm for a given tip location, we apply a voltage bias Vb between the tip and backgate in
COMSOL simulations, by specifically setting the tungsten portion of the tip to 0 V and the backgate to Vb. (For
example, see the diagram in Fig. 3A of the main text.) To account for the work function difference WAu −WW
between the tungsten and gold portions of the tip, we set the voltage of the gold portion of the tip to -0.92 V, as a
boundary condition. (Also see Sec. S8, below.) We then perform two simulations at each tip location; in both cases,
we solve for the electrostatic potential ϕ(rd) at the location of the defect. In the first simulation, we set Vb = 0, while
in the second simulation, we set Vb = 1 V, yielding the results ϕ(rd) = ϕ0V and ϕ(rd) = ϕ1V, respectively. From
such simulations, we can then define
αd = (ϕ1V −ϕ0V)/(1 V),
(S2)

===== Page 23 =====

23
which describes a specific tip-defect geometry.
To compute transition voltages as a function of tip position, such as the solid blue curves shown in Figs. S11(a)
and (c), we compare the reference values (Vtransition, αd, ϕ0V), obtained at a fixed tip location, to the same quantities
obtained at other tip locations, (V ′
transition, α′
d, ϕ′
0V). The relation between these sets of parameters is given by
V ′
transition = (αdVtransition + ϕ0V −ϕ′
0V)/α′
d.
(S3)
S3.
ALGORITHMS FOR IDENTIFYING CHARGING TRANSITIONS IN f-V CURVES
Charging events are observed as jumps in f-V curves, with several examples shown in Fig. S13(a).
A very
large number of transitions can be found in a large f-V map. In this section, we describe two algorithms used to
automatically determine the voltage biases Vtransition where these transitions occur.
b
c
d
Fit of g to g (Hz)
g – g (Hz)
e
Tip-backgate bias, Vb (V)
𝑓𝑛 (Hz)
a
f
g
g
Tip-backgate bias, Vb (V)
Tip-backgate bias, Vb (V)
Number of peaks detected
Peak prominence (Hz) 
𝑓𝑛 (Hz)
𝑓𝑛 (Hz)
Incorrectly 
identified 
transition
Overall fit
Data
Left-side fit
Right-side fit
Overall fit
Data
Left-side fit
Right-side fit
Tip-backgate bias, Vb (V)
Tip-backgate bias, Vb (V)
Figure S13. Algorithm 1 for detecting charging transitions and locating their position Vtransition in a voltage-bias sweep. (a) A
typical f-V curve with three charging transitions (circled). The experimental data points are denoted as fn. (b) The discrete
numerical derivative gn of fn, as defined in Eq. (S4) (blue curve). The orange curve shows a smooth approximation g for
the background signal, obtained by fitting a polynomial of degree 3 to the g data. (c) The difference g −g (green curve),
approximating just the peak contribution to g. The Python routine find_peaks identifies all possible peaks in this data
(orange × markers), including legitimate transition peaks as well as noise peaks. (d) Histogram of the ‘peak prominence’
values computed by find_peaks, defined as the height of the peaks relative to their nearby surroundings (thin orange vertical
bars). The corresponding distribution function (green curve) is determined by performing an exponential fit to the histogram.
We define a threshold peak prominence value below which the distribution falls below 1 (dashed lines), as described in the
main text. Peaks occurring on the right-hand side of this threshold are accepted as legitimate charging transitions. (e),(f)
Two examples of a method used to identify false positives in (d): for eight fn data points, centered at a transition identified
by Algorithm 1, straight lines are fit to the first four points, the last four points, and all eight points. If the slope of the
eight-point fit falls between the slopes of the other two fits, as it does in (f), then the transition is rejected. Otherwise, the
transition is accepted, as in (e).
Algorithm 1:
1. Compute a pointwise derivative of the f-V curve: if {fn} are consecutive data points in the f(V ) data set,
then the numerical differences are given by
gn = fn+1 −fn.
(S4)

===== Page 24 =====

24
For example, the f data in Fig. S13(a) yields the g data in Fig. S13(b, shown in blue).
2. Fit a polynomial of degree 3 to the g data, yielding the smoothed orange curve g in Fig. S13(b). This fit
is intentionally designed to smooth over transitions in the g data, yielding an approximation for the smooth
background, which excludes the transitions. The difference g −g then provides an approximation for just the
transition, with the background excluded, as shown by the green curve in Fig. S13(c).
3. Apply the routine find_peaks, from the scipy.signal Python library code base, to identify all peaks in g −g.
Based on the range of data shown in Fig. S13(c), we set the peak ‘prominence’ parameter to span the range of
[0, 5] Hz, so that it captures all possible peaks in the data set, even tiny peaks caused by noise. Here, the term
‘prominence’ refers to the height of the peak compared to its nearby surroundings. In Fig. S13(c), all peaks
identified by this routine are indicated with orange × markers.
4. Next, consider the distribution of the peak prominence values, as shown by thin vertical bars in Fig. S13(d).
This distribution is fit to an exponentially decaying function, shown by the green curve. We define a crossover
threshold for this distribution function at the point where it drops below 1, as indicated by the dashed lines. All
peaks occurring to the left of this threshold are considered to be noise, while peaks to the right are considered
to be legitimate charging transitions. The specific threshold value was determined by applying the procedure
to a set of 50 f-V curves for which charging transitions were identified manually; the value of 1 was found
to maximize the number of correct identifications, which we found to be 84.6% of total transitions in the test
data.
Algorithm 1 is found to be effective, but also yields false negative and false positive identifications of charging
transitions. To address the problem of false positives, we apply the simple procedure shown in Figs. S13(e) and (f).
Here, we consider seven fn data points centered around a candidate transition. We then fit straight lines to the
first three data points, the last three data points, and the full set of data points. If the slope of the fit to the full
set lies between the slopes of the left and right sets, the curve is classified as ‘smooth,’ meaning that it does not
contain a transition; non-smooth curves are then accepted as legitimate transitions. Using this procedure, the featue
in Fig. S13(e) is accepted as a legitimate transition, while the feature in Fig. S13(f) is not.
To address the problem of false negatives when identifying charging transitions, we apply a second algorithm.
Algorithm 2:
1. First fit the {fn} data set to a polynomial of degree 2, as shown by the orange curve in Fig. S14(a). We denote
this fitted curve as f, representing the smooth background of the f data.
2. Next, compute the difference ˜g = f −f to highlight the charging transitions, as shown in Fig. S14(b).
3. Compute the numerical derivative (difference) of ˜g between successive points, similar to Eq. (S4). A typical
result is shown in Fig. S14(c). Note that if a transition occurs to the left of the CPD, it will appear as an
upward peak in this derivative; here, the transitions occur to to the right of the CPD, and are therefore pointed
downward. To treat these different cases using the same numerical subroutine, we also change the sign of the
˜g data, as shown in Fig. S14(d), which gives upward peaks.
4. Again apply the routine find_peaks to identify upward-pointing peaks in both the positive and negative
derivative data. Here, we do not eliminate the small noise peaks analogously to Algorithm 1. Instead, we
choose a higher peak prominence threshold, as follows. First, we compute the standard deviation σdiff of the
difference data in Figs. S14(c) or (d). We then choose a minimum peak-prominence threshold value of 4σdiff
[indicated by the dashed line in Fig. S14(d)], which we find to be optimal for distinguishing legitimate peaks
from noise, resulting in the peaks indicated by × markers in Fig. S14(d). Note that no (upward) peaks were
identified by this method in Fig. S14(c), although we do find them in some cases. The 4σdiff threshold value
was determined after applying the algorithm to a set of 50 f-V curves for which the charging transitions
were identified manually; the factor of 4 was found to give the fewest false positive identifications among the
transitions that were not previously identified by Algorithm 1.
5. The transitions determined by Algorithm 2 are then combined with those from Algorithm 1.
Figure S15 shows histograms of transitions detected by Algorithm 2 that were not detected by Algorithm 1 for
forward voltage sweeps (blue) and backward voltage sweeps (yellow).

===== Page 25 =====

25
b
a
d
c
Tip-backgate bias, Vb (V)
Frequency shift (Hz)
g (Hz)
data, f
fit, f
Transitions
Derivative of g (Hz/V)
Negative of derivative of g 
(Hz/V)
~
~
~
Tip-backgate bias, Vb (V)
Tip-backgate bias, Vb (V)
Tip-backgate bias, Vb (V)
Figure S14. Algorithm 2 for detecting charging transitions and locating their position Vtransition in a voltage-bias sweep. (a)
A typical f-V curve is shown (blue curve), with three charging transitions as indicated. A parabolic fit f, shown in orange,
describes the background signal for f. (b) The difference ˜g = f −f highlights the charging transitions as singularities. (c),(d)
The numerical derivative of ˜g, and the same curve with its sign changed, which can both exhibit prominent upward peaks.
A threshold value for identifying legitimate peaks is given by 4σdiff, as indicated by the dashed line in (d). Here, σdiff is the
standard deviation of the numerical derivative of the ˜g data shown in (c). (See main text for explanation.) Upward-pointing
peaks larger than this threshold are identified by the find_peaks numerical routine, as indicated by × markers. These peaks
are added to the transitions identified by Algorithm 1, if not already present. In this example, no additional peaks were
identified in (c).
Number of transitions
Number of transitions
Tip-backgate bias (V)
Tip-backgate bias (V)
a
b
Figure S15. Histograms of charging transitions identified by Algorithm 2 that were not identified in Algorithm 1 for forward
voltage sweeps (blue) and backward voltage sweeps (orange).

===== Page 26 =====

26
0
10
20
0
10
20
Distance, x (nm)
Distance, y (nm)
-2.5 V to 2.5 V
(V)
a
0
10
20
Distance, x (nm)
Distance, y (nm)
0
10
20
2.5 V to 4.5 V
(V)
b
0
10
20
0
10
20
Distance, x (nm)
Distance, y (nm)
4.5 V to 5.5 V
(V)
c
0
10
20
0
10
20
Distance, x (nm)
Distance, y (nm)
Number of transitions
d
Figure S16. Maps of defect charging events and charging voltages. (a) Total number of charging transitions observed, per
pixel, over the whole [-2.5, 5.5] V sweep range of bias voltages. (b)-(d) Charging transition maps obtained in three different
bias windows. Individual defects become more visible and isolated in narrower bias windows; however, transitions appear
quite dense in the [4.5, 5.5] V window, shown in (d), so that it becomes difficult to isolate individual defects. Note that when
multiple transitions are present at a given pixel in (b)-(d), we only report the lowest voltage transition here.
S4.
IDENTIFYING INDIVIDUAL DEFECTS: LARGE-MAP METHOD
Chemical identification of defects in an oxide requires sorting through a large number of charging transitions to
identify all the transitions for a single defect, while excluding transitions from nearby defects. This procedure is
complicated by the fact that defects overlap in our EFM maps, in the sense that the “size” of a defect (the spatial
extent over which electrons tunnel between the tip and the defect) can be several nanometers, encompassing many
pixels. Hysteresis between charging transitions in forward and backward voltage bias sweeps further complicates
the identification procedure. The most accurate identifications are obtained when this hysteresis is minimized, by
centering the tip directly above the defect.
In this work, we consider two methods for identifying individual defects and locating their center pixel. In this
section, we describe a detailed approach for analyzing large transition maps, with the goal of isolating individual
defects within a large, coarse data set. In the next section, we describe a more-direct method, which is enabled by
in-situ analysis of transition voltage hysteresis data.
For the large-map analysis, we first note that most defect species exhibit multiple transitions, as confirmed in our
DFT calculations. This can be seen in Fig. S16(a), where transitions are enumerated at each pixel. We can partially
isolate individual defects by focusing on smaller bias-voltage windows, as shown in Figs. S16(b)-(d). Here, if multiple
transitions occur at a given pixel, we only show the lowest transition. In panels (b) and (c), we see individual defects
begin to emerge from the data, although such behavior is less apparent for the voltage range shown in (d). To identify
all the pixels associated with a single charging transition and a single defect, we need to link clusters of pixels in
different bias windows. Fortunately, charging events associated with the same defect and transition occur at similar
voltages on neighboring pixels, which makes our job easier. Generally, we find that a bias range of 0.7 V represents a

===== Page 27 =====

27
Blob A
Blob B
Blob C
Blob D
Blob E
Blob F
a
b
c
Number of eigenvalues
e
A
D
𝛼
𝛽
𝛾
B
E
C
F
𝛼
0
0
0
𝛽 
0
0
0
𝛾
 
−𝛼
0
0
0
−𝛽
0
0
0
−𝛾
−𝛼
0
0
0
−𝛽
0
0
0
−𝛾
 
𝛼
0
0
0
𝛽 
0
0
0
𝛾
A
B C
D
E
F
A
B
C
D
E
F
d
1.8 V to 2.5 V
1.6 V to 2.3 V
Overlapping pixels
𝛼
𝛽
𝛾
Log10 (eigenvalues)
f
(V)
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
2.0
2.1
2.2
2.3
1.9
2.0
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
(V)
2.5
Figure S17.
(a),(b) The CCA method, described in Sec. S4 A, identifies clusters of pixels, associated with a single defect,
which are all associated with the same charging transition, using criteria based on pixel adjacency and cluster size. (If no
charging transition is observed in the bias window, for a given pixel, that pixel is shaded white.) In SCA parlance, these
clusters are referred to as “blobs.” In (a) and (b), blobs A and D most likely describe the same defect observed in different
bias windows. Blobs B and E are similarly linked, as are blobs C and F. (c) The quantities α, β, γ describe the number of
overlapping pixels in the blobs illustrated in (a) and (b). (d) In the SCA, described in Sec. S4 B, blobs are represented by
nodes in an undirected graph, while the overlaps (α, β, γ) describe the weights of the edges connecting those nodes. (e) The
SCA Laplacian matrix corresponding to the graph shown in (d). (See text for discussion.) (f) Eigenvalues are shown for a
typical Laplacian matrix. The number of eigenvalues near zero corresponds to the number of unique defects and transitions
observed across multiple bias windows, while their corresponding eigenvectors describe the linkages between windows. In this
example, 45 clusters are identified as unique defect transitions. The complete defect, observed across many windows, is then
given by the union of pixels linked in this way, across those windows.
good “Goldilocks” value, which picks up most of the pixels belonging to a single defect and transition, while retaining
a reduced density of transitions within the bias window. We therefore adopt 0.7 V as the width of the bias windows
in the following analysis.
To identify clusters of pixels belonging to the same defect and transition, we first apply a Connected Component
Analysis (CCA) [50, 51] to every bias window. We then link defects in different bias windows by applying a Spectral
Clustering Algorithm (SCA) [52]. If any defects overlap, particularly defects belonging to the same chemical species,
they can be distinguished by the fact that their combined cluster forms an irregular, noncircular shape; a Gaussian
Mixture Model (GMM) Algorithm [53] is then used to split such clusters into smaller, regular shapes representing
individual defects. Finally, once all the pixels for a given defect and transition have been identified, we apply a
Gaussian Blur procedure to approximately identify the centermost pixel of a cluster, where the charging transition

===== Page 28 =====

28
Largest radius of enclosing circle 
(nm)
Lower bound of voltage interval (V)
Figure S18. The radius of the minimum enclosing circle (see main text) is reported for each defect cluster identified by the
CCA, as illustrated in Figs. S17(a) and (b), for each bias window. Here, the bias windows are labeled by their lower-bound
voltages. A sudden jump is observed at the lower-bound voltage of 3.2 V, indicating the point where defects are so dense
that our CCA analysis fails, as it captures multiple defects rather than just one. Bias windows to the right of this dashed line
therefore are excluded from further analysis.
hysteresis should be minimized. We now describe these algorithms in more detail.
A.
Connected Component Analysis
Figures S16(b) and (c) show charging transition maps, for bias windows smaller than the full range. Here, the
windows are still quite large, so that most of the pixels forming a single defect are displayed; however, the defects
are seen to overlap significantly. (Note that, if more than one transition is observed at a given pixel, only the lowest
transition voltage is reported in the figure.) As noted above, to help isolate the defects, we therefore consider smaller
bias windows of width 0.7 V, yielding results like those shown in Figs. S17(a) and (b), where the defects are largely
distinct. The same defect naturally appears in closely separated bias windows. In this analysis, we divide the full
bias scan of width [-2.5, 5.5] V into a set of overlapping windows of width 0.7 V, offset by increments of 0.05 V.
Thus, the full set of bias windows that could be considered is given by [-2.5, -1.8] V, [-2.45, -1.75] V, . . . , [4.5, 5.2] V.
However, in practice, we reduce the upper range of this set, as described in the following paragraph.
We now apply a Connected Component Analysis (CCA) to transition maps for each of the bias windows. This
procedure groups together all pixels that (i) show a transition in the given bias window and (ii) share an edge or a
corner. (For a given pixel, there can be eight such nearest neighbors.) Clusters containing ten or more pixels are then
accepted as legitimate defects. Figures S17(a) and (b) illustrate some typical (circled) defects identified in this way.
To further analyze the defects, we apply the OpenCV python routine minEnclosingCircle to determine the circle
of minimum radius that encloses a given cluster [yielding the circles shown in Figs. S17(a) and (b)]. In Fig. S18, we
plot the enclosing radiuses as a function of the lower-bound voltage of each bias window. The results reveal a jump in
radius size, beyond the (lower-bound) voltage bias of 3.2 V, indicating that beyond this point, the defects become so
dense that it is impossible to identify individual defects by this method. This is also consistent with our observation
that typical defect radiuses fall in the range of 2-3 nm. Thus we do not consider any (lower-bound) voltage biases
beyond 3.2 V, i.e., we restrict our analysis to the voltage range [-2.5, 3.9] V, and the highest bias interval we study is
[3.2, 3.9] V. Using this CCA method, 70% of the pixels showing transitions were grouped into defect clusters, while
the remaining transitions (on isolated pixels) were regarded as “noise” and discarded.
B.
Spectral Clustering Algorithm
The goal of this section is to develop an automated scheme to collect all the pixels associated with a defect, for
each of its different charging transitions. These defect maps can be observed across multiple bias windows, although
the pixel arrangements may differ from window to window. For example, in Figs. S17(a) and (b), the pixels largely
overlap, while in Fig. S19, they do not, although our analysis suggests they correspond to the same defect. (The
bias windows in Fig. S19 are well-separated in voltage space.) To complete our task, and correctly link defects in

===== Page 29 =====

29
2.4 V to 3.1 V
1.8 V to 2.5 V
a
b
(V)
(V)
Figure S19.
A single defect transition can appear in multiple bias windows, but it often takes a slightly different shape in
those windows. Thus, while narrower bias ranges are useful for isolating individual defects, it is important to stitch together
multiple windows, to obtain a full description of a defect.
different windows, we apply a Spectral Clustering Algorithm (SCA).
SCA is a graph theoretical technique, whose details are described in [52]. Here, we limit the discussion to our
particular SCA implementation. The first step in this procedure is to label the defect clusters identified by the CCA,
for all bias windows. [Two examples are shown in Figs. S17(a) and (b).] In SCA parlance, these are referred to as
“blobs.” Next, we count the overlapping pixels in these blobs. In the example illustrated in Fig. S17(c), these overlaps
are labeled α, β, γ. In the SCA, such overlaps (α, β, γ) become weights assigned to the edges connecting the nodes
(A-F) of an undirected graph, as illustrated in Fig. S17(d). In this particular example, the blobs are well-isolated
and the graph is simple; however, the SCA robustly disentangles more complicated geometries containing multiply
overlapping blobs. We then define a Laplacian matrix, L = D −A, as illustrated in Fig. S17(e), where the rows
and columns represent the nodes in the graph. The adjacency matrix A describes the weights of the edges, with Aij
representing the weight between nodes i and j and Aii = 0, while the diagonal matrix D describes the total weight
of each node: Dii = P
j Aij. For the simple example shown in Fig. S17, these diagonals are simply given by α, β, γ,
since the blobs are well-isolated. Finally, by diagonalizing L, we obtain a set of nearly degenerate eigenvalues near
zero, as illustrated in Fig. S17(f), whose eigenvectors describe the properly linked blobs, according to SCA theory.
C.
Gaussian Mixture Model Algorithm
The SCA is unable to distinguish overlapping defects appearing in the same bias window.
This is especially
relevant for defects of the same chemical species, which naturally exhibit charging transitions in the same bias
voltage range.
Only a few tools are available to potentially unravel such behavior, the most prominent being
the irregular shape of a multi-defect cluster.
Since single-defect clusters are roughly circular, a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) [53] algorithm can be effective for splitting up combined clusters. Here, we use the routine
sklearn.mixture.GaussianMixture from the scikit-learn python library to implement such a GMM algorithm.
The number of component defects that a cluster should be divided into depends in part on its pixel count. Visual
inspection suggests that the maximum size of single-defect clusters is about 50-60 pixels, as constrained by the
maximum distance that electron can tunnel between the tip and a defect near the sample surface. For reference,
many of the pixels considered in this work are of size 0.5×0.5 nm2. Clusters larger than 60 pixels are found to
be irregularly shaped, suggesting that they include multiple defects. Clusters smaller than 50 pixels are typically
circular, suggesting that they correspond to single defects.
We apply the following procedure to split large clusters into smaller ones. For clusters in the range of 50-60 pixels,
we first apply the python routine minEnclosingCircle (see above) to determine the minimum circle enclosing the
pixels constituting a defect. This is then used to determine the “compactness” of the defect, defined as the number
of pixels in the cluster, divided by the the area of the minimum enclosing circle. This compactness definition can
also be thought of as “circular-ness.” If the compactness value is found to be lower than 0.6, indicating a non-circular
shape, the GMM algorithm is applied. For clusters of size >60, the GMM is always applied. The number n of smaller
clusters that a large cluster with M pixels is split into depends on M: here, we choose n = ⌈M/60⌉, where ⌈·⌉is the
integer ceiling function. If one of the resulting small clusters has a pixel count ≥15 and a compactness value ≥0.4,

===== Page 30 =====

30
z
Vb (V)
Figure S20.
Gaussian Mixture Model. The SCA, described above, yields a potential defect cluster as shown in the center
panel. The number M of pixels in this cluster is >60, indicating that it probably contains more than one defect, as confirmed
by its irregular shape. A GMM algorithm is applied to split the large cluster into n = 2 smaller gaussians as shown on the
left and right. Both of these smaller clusters are accepted as valid defects, based on the criteria described in the main text.
it is accepted as a valid defect. (We have found a compactness value of 0.6 to provide a good threshold for large
defects with 50-60 pixels, while a compactness value of 0.4 is more appropriate for smaller defects.) If its pixel count
is <15, it is rejected and discarded. If the pixel count is ≥15 but its compactness value is <0.4, the GMM procedure
is repeated once more, while setting n = 2. After this second iteration, if the defect still doesn’t have a compactness
value >0.4, we exclude from the compactness analysis any pixels that are only connected to the cluster by a corner,
provided their total number doesn’t constitute more than 25% of the total. If the resulting compactness value is
>0.4, the cluster is accepted. If not, the GMM algorithm is repeated one more time. Any clusters not meeting the
appropriate criteria at this point are rejected. A simple example of our GMM procedure is illustrated in Fig. S20
D.
Locating the defect center using a gaussian blur
It is important to identify the pixel at the center of a given defect, because the charging transition observed at
this pixel should be minimally affected by hysteresis. In a forward-bias sweep, this center point should occur at the
lowest (i.e., the most negative or least positive) charging voltage of all the pixels comprising the defect. However,
such behavior can be obscured by hysteresis, stochastic tunneling, or experimental noise. The ambiguity of the center
point is apparent in Fig. S21(a), where the map is even missing some pixels around the edges.
To overcome this problem, we apply a gaussian blur procedure to smooth out the data. Specifically, we use the
SciPy routine gaussian_filter, adopting a standard deviation of σ = 1 pixels for the gaussian, and a truncation
width of 5 pixels. A typical smoothed result is shown in Fig. S21(b) for the same defect as Fig. S21(a). After applying
the blur, the defect center is identified as the pixel with the lowest voltage.
Using the combined techniques described above, our large-map method is able to confirm the presence of 15 defects
1 nm
1 nm
0.9
1.0
1.1
Vb (V)
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.5
a
b
Figure S21.
Identifying the center pixel of a defect. Following the CCA, SCA, and GMM procedures, the center pixel is
determined for every defect-transition. (a) The resulting transition maps are noisy, complicating this task. (b) The same
data is smoothed, using a gaussian blur technique, as described in the text. (The same color bar is used for both panels.)
For a forward-bias sweep, the defect center is then chosen as the pixel with the least-positive or most-negative transition bias
voltage.

===== Page 31 =====

31
across the 25 × 25 nm2 scan area and locate their center pixels. In the analyses described below and in the main
text, these 15 defects are labeled 1, 2, 4-13, 17, 19, and 20.
S5.
IDENTIFYING INDIVIDUAL DEFECTS: HYSTERESIS METHOD
Following upon our new understanding of defect centers from the previous section, we now also apply a second
method to identify defects and locate their centers. This method involves acquiring finer scan date centered around
the candidate defects. Through repeated measurements, we identify the defect center as the location where the
average transition-voltage hysteresis is minimized. We then perform repeated voltage sweeps and vertical position
scans at these center pixels, to obtain averaged results with higher accuracy, and determine the corresponding
standard deviations. A total of five additional defects were identified this way, corresponding to the defects labeled
3, 14, 15, 16, and 18. We now provide some details related to this method.
A.
High-resolution scans
Most of the scans in this work were performed at a pixel resolution of 0.5×0.5 nm2. However, additional information
is obtained from higher-resolution images, such as the 0.2×0.2 nm2, 0.12×0.12 nm2, and 0.1×0.1 nm2 pixel resolutions
shown in Figs. S22-S24, corresponding to Defects 3, 15, and 14, respectively. As usual here, when multiple transitions
are observed at a single pixel, only the lowest voltage transition is shown on the map. Additionally, we note these
particular defects were chosen for further high-resolution study because they were already well-resolved. This helps
to identify individual transitions, because the transition-identifying algorithms described in Sec. S3 can then be
tuned by hand to provide very detailed images with great clarity, as seen in Figs. S22-S24. Such images provide
insight into the spatial profile of the defects, including the transition voltage variations and the changes in hysteresis
observed when moving away from the defect centers. They also clearly illustrate the differences in the charging
behaviors between forward (charging) scans and backward (discharging) scans. Unlike the low-resolution results,
the centermost pixel of the high-resolution images is relatively easy to to pick out, without applying a multistep
procedure. These images are therefore also used to identify defects, together with the low-resolution images.
B.
Dependence of hysteresis on tip height
Figures S22-S24 reveal charging-transition hysteresis as a function of tip-defect separation, as the tip is scanned
laterally. In this section, we also study hysteretic behavior as a function of tip-sample separation, while the tip is
positioned directly above the defect.
In Fig. S25, we plot f-V curves for Defects 3, 14, 15, 16, and 18. In each case, we perform forward and backward
bias sweeps at the same tip-sample separation, observing matching charging transitions. We then repeat such voltage
1 nm
1 nm
-1.25
-0.75
-0.25
0.25
-1.25
-0.75
-0.25
0.25
Charging voltage of defect 3
Discharging voltage of defect 3
a
b
(V)
(V)
Figure S22. Charging-transition scans of defect 3 (at lower right), obtained at a pixel resolution of 0.2 × 0.2 nm2. (a) A
charging scan, from a forward voltage sweep. (b) A discharging scan, from a backward voltage sweep. Other nearby defects
can also be observed within the scan range.

===== Page 32 =====

32
-2.5
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
-2.5
-2.0
-1.5
1.0
-0.5
(V)
(V)
1 nm
Charging voltage of defect 15
Discharging voltage of defect 15
a
b
1 nm
Figure S23. Charging-transition scans of defect 15 (at upper middle), obtained at a pixel resolution of 0.12 × 0.12 nm2. (a) A
charging scan, from a forward voltage sweep. (b) A discharging scan, from a backward voltage sweep. Other nearby defects
can also be observed within the scan range.
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
(V)
(V)
1 nm
1 nm
Charging voltage of defect 14
Discharging voltage of defect 14
a
b
Figure S24. Charging-transition scans of defect 14 (at lower left), obtained at a pixel resolution of 0.1 × 0.1 nm2. (a) A
charging scan, from a forward voltage sweep. (b) A discharging scan, from a backward voltage sweep. Other nearby defects
can also be observed within the scan range.
sweeps for five different tip-sample separations, observing changes in the transition voltages that can be ascribed to
hysteresis.
In Fig. S26, we plot these forward and backward transition voltages for a wider range of tip-sample separations.
Interestingly, we observe a variety of hysteretic behaviors that could potentially yield useful information about the
transitions and the chemical species of the defects, when combined with DFT calculations. Such behavior will be
explored in a future publication.
S6.
DETERMINING THE SIGN OF A CHARGED DEFECT
A.
Evidence for local charge fluctuations
The CPD condition, Vb = VCPD, corresponds to the backgate voltage at which an f-V curve is maximized and
∂f/∂V = 0; it also represents the point where the tip-sample interactions vanish.
VCPD is found to vary as a
function of the lateral position in an EFM scan across a sample, reflecting the presence of locally charged defects.
VCPD measurements also reveal hysteresis between forward and backward EFM bias sweeps, similar to the hysteresis
observed in the charging transitions. The local variations and hysteresis effects are evident in histograms of the CPD
values shown in Fig. S27(a). Despite this variability, we argue here that, in the absence of tip-sample interactions,
we should expect the total integrated charge across a sample to vanish. It is therefore meaningful to compare locally
varying CPD values to this globally averaged CPD value, defined as V∆Φ = VCPD, because the latter provides a

===== Page 33 =====

33
Frequency Shift (Hz)
Frequency Shift (Hz)
Frequency Shift (Hz)
Tip-backgate bias (V)
Tip-backgate bias (V)
Tip-backgate bias (V)
Defect 3 
Defect 15 
Defect 18 
c
e
a
Frequency Shift (Hz)
Tip-backgate bias (V)
Defect 14 
b
Frequency Shift (Hz)
Tip-backgate bias (V)
d
Defect 16 
Figure S25.
Forward (blue) and backward (orange) f-V sweeps, with matched charging transitions, are obtained at five
different tip-sample separations. (See Fig. S26 for additional details.) Hysteresis is reflected by the fact that transitions occur
at different voltages in the forward and backward sweeps.
The hysteresis is found to increase with increasing tip-sample
separations. Here, if multiple transitions are present, we circle the main transition of interest.
reference value for quantifying the local fluctuations. At the center of a defect, we assume that the local electrostatic
fluctuations are dominated by the charge of the defect. Thus, while the precise value of VCPD is affected by many
nearby defects, the sign of VCPD −V∆Φ should reflect the sign of the charge state of the dominant defect, as measured
by a nearby EFM tip.
Determining the sign of the local charge state is complicated by the presence of hysteresis in the forward and
backward sweeps, which introduces errors or uncertainty into the analysis. Here, we separately consider the average
CPD values for the forward and backward sweeps, V fwd
CPD = −0.33 V and V bwd
CPD = −0.17 V, such that V∆Φ =
(V fwd
CPD + V bwd
CPD)/2 = −0.25 V. For reference, we show in Fig. S27(b) the histogram of CPD values obtained by
averaging the forward and backward CPDs for a large number of sweeps. We then declare the local charge state to
be negative when VCPD > V bwd
CPD, for either the forward or backward sweep, and we declare the local charge state to
be positive when VCPD < V fwd
CPD, for either the forward or backward sweep.
This leaves us with an exclusion zone defined by V fwd
CPD < VCPD < V bwd
CPD, where we declare the local charge state to
be approximately neutral, due to the uncertainty caused by hysteresis. Note again, according to the definition above,
that “neutral” refers to the case where the forward and backward CPDs both fall into the exclusion zone. Here,
we reject such neutral defects from further analysis, similar to other rejection criteria described in Secs. S3 and S4.
We justify such an approach by again noting the uncertainty in our determination of a defect’s charge state, due to
hysteresis. Additionally, we note that this rejection criterion helps to eliminate cases where two defects of opposite
charge sign are observed in close proximity at a single pixel, since these would tend to approximately cancel. It is
preferable to ignore these cases because we find them difficult to classify via the procedures described here. Finally,
in addition to neutral defects, we also reject defects found to be positively charged in one voltage sweep direction
and negatively charged in the opposite sweep direction, due to their ambiguous classification.
B.
Locating the CPD
The identification of the CPD is complicated by the presence of charging transitions in the f-V curves, as well as
noisy data. Below, we describe our automated procedure for locating the CPD.
1. The f-V scan is first sectioned into regions separated by charging transitions, where the charging transitions

===== Page 34 =====

34
Defect 3 
Defect 15 
Defect 18 
a
c
e
Charging Voltages (V)
Charging Voltages (V)
Charging Voltages (V)
Tip-sample separation (nm)
Tip-sample separation (nm)
Tip-sample separation (nm)
Defect 14 
b
Charging Voltages (V)
Tip-sample separation (nm)
Defect 16 
d
Charging Voltages (V)
Tip-sample separation (nm)
Figure S26. Charging transition voltages are reported for forward (blue) and backward (orange) f-V sweeps, like those shown
in Fig. S25, for the same five defects studied there.
Here, multiple sweeps are performed at each tip-sample separation,
to obtain more-accurate averaged results, with error bars representing the standard deviation.
The results reveal several
interesting types of hysteretic behavior.
were identified in Sec. S3. Each section of curve is fit separately to a polynomial of degree 10. The zeros of the
first derivatives of this curve give a set of local extrema. From this set, we choose CPD values for which the
second derivatives, evaluated at the extremum values, are negative. This gives a set of CPD candidates.
2. If there is just one CPD candidate from this procedure, then it is accepted.
3. If there are no candidates, we choose the voltage that maximizes the f-V curve.
4. If there are multiple candidates, we reject any candidate that falls within 0.1 V of a charging transition, as the
transitions are sometimes found to be broadened over several experimental voltage steps, which could lead to
spurious CPD identifications. If there are still multiple candidates after this, we accept the candidate with a
voltage closest to the maximum value of the f-V curve.
S7.
MATCHING TRANSITIONS IN THE FORWARD AND BACKWARD VOLTAGE SWEEPS
For the defect analysis described in the main text, we only consider charging transitions that are observed in both
the forward and backward f-V scans. This is important because of the hysteresis observed in many transitions.
We therefore need to match corresponding transitions in the forward and backward scans, including for cases when
multiple transitions are present. As noted above, the “fundamental” charging transition voltage Vtransition is taken
to be the average value of the forward and backward transitions, as determined for the closest separation between
the defect and the EFM tip. Although automated or semi-automated procedures were developed for many other
aspects of our analysis, this matching procedure was performed by hand. Fortunately, the matching only needs to
be performed once per defect, so the human burden was not excessive.
The procedure we use is as follows. First, the center pixel of the defect is determined using methods described in
previous sections. At this center-pixel location, the charging transition signal is largest, and the hysteresis is smallest,
due to close proximity of the tip to the defect. Following the procedure described in Sec. S3, valid transitions are
identified and spurious transitions are rejected. Matching then proceeds by considering both the size of the f-V
jumps and the proximity of the transitions along the voltage axis. The procedure is somewhat self-explanatory, as

===== Page 35 =====

35
Tip-backgate bias (V)
Number of pixels
Tip-backgate bias (V)
Number of pixels
a
b
Figure S27.
Histograms of CPD measurements obtained for every pixel in the 25 × 25 nm2 scan range. (For this data, only
one forward and one backward voltage sweep was performed at each pixel and no averages were performed.) (a) CPD values
obtained from the forward (blue) and backward (orange) f-V voltage sweeps. Note the presence of (i) hysteresis between the
forward and backward sweeps, evidenced by the shifted distributions, and (ii) local fluctuations in the electrostatic landscape,
caused by charged defects, as reflected in the widths of the distributions. The mean values of the blue and orange distributions
are given by V fwd
CPD = −0.33 V and V bwd
CPD = −0.17 V, respectively. (b) The same histogram data as (a), where the CPDs
from the forward and backward f-V sweeps have been averaged.
The mean value of this green distribution is given by
V∆Φ = −0.25 V.
seen in Figs. S28-S32, where we show the f-V curves for all 20 defects identified in this work. Here, in all figures,
the forward sweep is shown in blue, while the backward sweep is shown in orange. For defects identified by the
large-map method in Sec. S4, only one forward and one backward voltage scan is obtained. For defects identified by
the hysteresis method in Sec. S5, multiple sweeps are obtained and plotted in the figures. These repeated sweeps
are used to obtain statistics for the transition voltages in forward or backward sweeps, including average values and
standard deviations. In many cases, the matching is straight-forward (e.g., Defect 1). In some cases, the size of the
jumps in the forward and backward sweeps is not perfectly matched (e.g., Defect 7); however, the f-V curves overlap
well, outside the hysteretic region, giving more confidence in the matching assignment. In cases where multiple
transitions are present, we look for overlapping f-V curves outside the hysteretic region. In Figs. S28-S32, matched
transitions are indicated by the same color circles; if the transitions are very close together along the voltage axis,
we only use a single circle. We reject any transitions whose step size is less than 20% of the largest transition, in
either the forward or backward sweep; in such cases, it is assumed that the transition arises from a different, nearby
defect (e.g., see Defect 10).
S8.
CONVERTING EXPERIMENTAL CHARGING-TRANSITION VOLTAGES Vtransition TO DEFECT
ENERGIES ∆
A charging transition occurs when the chemical potential of a defect crosses the Fermi level of the tip EF,tip, and if
the tip and defect are close enough for tunneling to occur. The process is controlled by the tip-backgate voltage bias,
as illustrated in Fig. S33. In this section, we explain the procedure for converting the experimentally determined
transition bias voltage Vtransition to the chemical potential of the charging transition ∆, where ∆is defined relative
to the valence band edge, to allow for direct comparison with DFT predictions.
The conversion procedure involves relating ∆and EF,tip to the spatially varying vacuum energy Evac(r), indicated
by dashed purple lines in the figure. Here, the sudden jump in Evac reflects the difference in work functions between
the gold and tungsten portions of the tip while the slower changes in Evac reflect the spatially varying electrostatic
potential energy. The gold and tungsten work functions are given by WAu = 5.30 eV and WW = 4.38 eV, where
WAu is reported in [60] and WW is measured in Sec. S2 A, yielding the difference −(WAu −WW)/e = −0.92 V used
in our simulations (for example, see Sec. S2, and below). The work function of the molybdenum backgate is taken
to be WMo = 4.63 eV (see Sec. S2 A). The energy difference between the vacuum level and the valence band edge
(sometimes referred to as the ionization potential) is given by Ev=7.169 eV, as obtained by DFT and described in
Materials and Methods.
Figure S33 illustrates two important bias conditions. Figure S33(a) shows the CPD condition, with the voltage

===== Page 36 =====

36
Defect 2 
b
Defect 1
a
Defect 4
d
a
Defect 3
c
Figure S28. Matching charging transitions in forward (blue) and backward (orange) f-V scans, for Defects 1-4. Circle colors
indicate matched transitions; if transitions are closely separated, only one circle is shown. If multiple scans are shown, the
transitions are assigned their average voltage values, for both forward or backward scans. Note that different vertical scales
are used in the plots.
Defect 5
a
Defect 6 
b
Defect 7 
c
Defect 8
d
Figure S29. Matching charging transitions in forward (blue) and backward (orange) f-V scans, for Defects 5-8. Circle colors
indicate matched transitions; if transitions are closely separated, only one circle is shown. If multiple scans are shown, the
transitions are assigned their average voltage values, for both forward or backward scans. Note that different vertical scales
are used in the plots.

===== Page 37 =====

37
a
Defect 9
Defect 10
b
Defect 11
c
Defect 12
d
Figure S30. Matching charging transitions in forward (blue) and backward (orange) f-V scans, for Defects 9-12. Circle colors
indicate matched transitions; if transitions are closely separated, only one circle is shown. If multiple scans are shown, the
transitions are assigned their average voltage values, for both forward or backward scans. Note that different vertical scales
are used in the plots.
Defect 13
a
Defect 14
b
Defect 15
c
Defect 16
d
Figure S31. Matching charging transitions in forward (blue) and backward (orange) f-V scans, for Defects 13-16. Circle colors
indicate matched transitions; if transitions are closely separated, only one circle is shown. If multiple scans are shown, the
transitions are assigned their average voltage values, for both forward or backward scans. Note that different vertical scales
are used in the plots.

===== Page 38 =====

38
Defect 17
a
Defect 18 
b
Defect 19
c
Defect 20 
d
Figure S32. Matching charging transitions in forward (blue) and backward (orange) f-V scans, for Defects 17-20. Circle colors
indicate matched transitions; if transitions are closely separated, only one circle is shown. If multiple scans are shown, the
transitions are assigned their average voltage values, for both forward or backward scans. Note that different vertical scales
are used in the plots.
bias Vb = VCPD corresponding to the point where the tip-sample interaction vanishes. Due to the presence of charged
defects, VCPD varies locally. However, since our device is undoped, we expect the total integrated charge in the
sample, including positively and negatively charged defects, to be zero at the CPD condition, since the sample as
a whole is unaffected by the tip. The globally averaged CPD voltage should therefore represent the bias for which
the vacuum energies of the backgate and the tungsten portion of the tip line up. In our experiments, this globally
averaged CPD value is found to be V∆Φ = VCPD ≈−0.25 V, as also discussed in Sec. S6 A.
With these definitions, we obtain the following relation between Vtransition and ∆:
∆= −eαd(Vtransition −V∆Φ) + Ev −WW −Evac(rd).
(S5)
Here, the lever arm αd between the tip and the defect is computed as in Sec. S2 E, for the case when the tip is
situated directly above the defect at a tip-sample separation of hts = 0.56 nm, and Evac(rd) is the vacuum energy at
the location of the defect, when the backgate voltage bias is set to Vb = V∆Φ. As usual in these simulations, we set
the boundary condition on the tungsten portion of the tip to 0 V, while we set the gold portion of the tip to -0.92 V,
to account for work function difference between the two metals, WAu −WW. For simplicity here, since tunneling
occurs over very short distances, we assume that the defect lies at the sample surface. For these settings, we obtain
Evac(rd)=0.120 eV and αd=0.243 eV/V.
Figure S33(b) shows the bias condition corresponding to a charging transition where the chemical potential of the
defect aligns with the Fermi level of the tip. To compute the chemical potential ∆at this transition, we simply plug
into Eq. (S5) the experimentally determined value of Vtransition, keeping all the other quantities in the equation fixed.
S9.
LIKELIHOOD METHODS FOR ASSIGNING DEFECT SPECIES
A.
Likelihood methods
We use the likelihood functional in Eq. (1) of the main text to provide our best guess for identifying the chemical
species of a given defect. The method is described in the main text, with additional details given below.

===== Page 39 =====

39
Backgate
Tungsten tip
Au
Evac(rd
)
WAu
EF,ti
p
WW
Evac, W= 0eV
Evac, Mo= 0eV
∆𝑈
Energy (eV)
VΔΦ
∆
Evalenc
e
Econduction
Silicon
Oxide
WMo
Evac, Au
E
v
a
Backgate
Tungsten tip
Au
Evac(rd) + ∆U 
WMo
WAu
EF,ti
p
WW
Evac, W= 0eV
Evac, Au
Evac, Mo= 
-e(Vtransition-V
ΔΦ)
Energy (eV)
Vtransitio
n
∆
Evalenc
e
Econduction
Silicon
Oxide
E
v
b
Figure S33.
Defining two special values of the backgate bias: V∆Φ and Vtransition. (a) V∆Φ corresponds to the special value
that causes the vacuum levels of the tungsten portion of the tip and the backgate to align. To account for local fluctuations of
the electrostatic potential, we take V∆Φ to be the sample-averaged value of the CPD bias, since this should correspond to the
sample-averaged charge-neutral state. When the voltage bias is given by V∆Φ, the vacuum energy Evac has the same value at
the very top and very bottom of the device, representing a condition of vanishing tip-sample interaction. (b) Vtransition is the
backgate bias that induces a charging event on the defect when its chemical potential aligns with the Fermi level of the tip,
as described by Eq. (S5).
Single-defect identification. In the first set of columns in Table 1 of the main text, we list the probabilities for
matching a subset of experimental and theoretical charging transitions, observed at the center pixel of a defect,
to the predictions for a single defect species. This identification is complicated by the fact that many f-V scans
exhibit transitions from multiple defects. Our identification method must therefore allow for experimental transitions
that match the theoretical predictions, but are interspersed with unmatched transitions. In principle, this is not a
problem, since all the transitions in a given scan are analyzed, and low probability matches are simply discarded. On
the other hand, for each defect species considered, we insist that all theoretically predicted transitions falling within
the experimental measurement window must be observed in the data.
In all cases, only transitions with the correct charge sign are considered, as defined in Sec. S6. Thus, if the defect
is determined to be positively charged, it can only be matched to the chemical species CAl-H, CO, CO-H, or VO,
while a negatively charged defect can be matched to VAl, VAl-H, or VAl-2H. The likelihood of a given matching
assignment is computed using the functional defined in Eq. (1) of the main text, where i = 1 to k enumerates the
charging transitions of a given defect and k is determined by the defect species. We then convert this likelihood
to a probability by computing the ratio of the maximum likelihood, corresponding to the case where each of the

===== Page 40 =====

40
Upper bound (eV)
Chemical potentials at which
candidate defects
charge (eV)
Eupper −ρupper
CAl-H : 3.35
CO : 2.82
CO-H : 2.57
VO : 3.2
Eupper, Eupper + ρupper
CAl-H : 3.35
CO : 2.82, 4.07
CO-H : 2.57, 4.06
VO : 3.2, 4.1
Table S1.
Chemical potentials computed by DFT, for the positively charged defects studied in this work. As described in
Sec. S9 A, we consider three different upper bounds for the experimental measurement range, to account for experimental
uncertainties. For the upper bounds shown in the left column, we consider the DFT-computed transitions for different defect
species shown in the right column, in both our single-defect and multi-defect analyses. Here, Eupper is the chemical potential
corresponding to the upper bound of the experimental measurements, and ρupper is the experimental uncertainty near this
boundary.
experimental measurements for the transition energy (∆i) is equal to its theoretical estimate from DFT calculations
(Ei). If n is the number of charging transitions expected in the experimental range, for a given defect, then we must
have n ≤k. We then compute the likelihood of all (
k
n) transition matches and choose the result with the highest
probability. As noted above, we allow for the possibility that a charging transition may not be observed if it falls
close to the edge of the experimental sweep range. Here, “close” refers to the experimental uncertainty ρi [defined in
Eq. (S6), below] of the chemical potential assignment [Eq. (S5)], for a given transition. To account for this variable
fitting range we apply the following strategy. In the absence of experimental uncertainties, we have the default
energy fitting window, given by [Elower, Eupper], where Elower corresponds to the lower voltage bound of -2.5 V, and
Eupper corresponds to the upper voltage bound of 5.5 V. Now including uncertainties, we consider an extended set of
fitting boundaries; for example, the lower bound becomes Elower →(Elower −ρlower, Elower, or Elower + ρlower), and
similarly for the upper bound, where ρlower is the value of ρi near Elower and ρupper is the value of ρi near Eupper.
Our procedure is then to fit defect transitions within each of these ranges, to obtain assignment probabilities, as
described above. Looking at all of these different results, we then choose the fit that gives the highest probability,
which may or may not include edge-case transitions. We note that for negatively charged defects, no transitions occur
near Eupper, while for positively charged defects, no transitions occur near Elower. Tables S1 and S2 thus describe
the defect transitions that fall within these different fitting ranges, for positively charged defects (Table S1) or for
negatively charge defects (Table S2). The resulting identifications based on this analysis are listed from best to worst
in Table 1 of the main text, according to their probabilities. We note that the ability to ignore some transitions could
allow too much flexibility in assigning defects. This suggests applying a multiple-defect analysis where all charging
transitions must be accounted for. On the other hand, the multi-defect scheme also has its own deficiencies, since it
assumes that all possible defects have been characterized by DFT; hence, if one of the contributing defects has not
been included in the DFT analysis, then none of the contributing defects can be properly identified.
Multiple-defect identification. In the second set of columns in Table 1, we list the probabilities for the simultaneous
matching of multiple defects. The matching procedure is similar to our previous approach for single defects; however
in this case, we insist that all charging transitions observed in an f-V sweep must be accounted for. We do this by
matching the experimental transitions to groups of theoretically predicted defects whose charging transitions have
the same sign. For the multiple-defect identification procedure, we insist that all theoretically predicted transitions
falling within the experimental measurement window must be observed in the data, unless the theoretical prediction
falls very close to the edge of the experimental range. We define such edge cases as falling within a border of width
ρi, as discussed above. For other cases, where an expected transition is not observed, the match is considered to
be unsuccessful. The defect groupings are also required to have the correct number of transitions in total. Here
again, we allow for the possibility of edge cases, such that transitions occurring within an experimental uncertainty
of ρi, near the experimental measurement boundaries, may or may not be included in the analysis.
As for the
single-defect analysis, the likelihoods of the individual defect matchings are computed and converted to probabilities.
The probability of the defect grouping is then obtained as the product of single-defect probabilities.

===== Page 41 =====

41
Lower bound (eV) Chemical potentials at which
candidate defects
discharge (eV)
Elower −ρlower
VAl : 1.84, 2.32, 2.81
VAl-H : 2.42
VAl-2H : 1.91
Elower
VAl : 2.32, 2.81
VAl-H: 2.42
VAl-2H: 1.91
Elower + ρlower
VAl : 2.32, 2.81
VAl-H: 2.42
Table S2.
Chemical potentials computed by DFT, for the negatively charged defects studied in this work. As described
in Sec. S9 A, we consider three different lower bounds for the experimental measurement range, to account for experimental
uncertainties. For the lower bounds shown in the left column, we consider the DFT-computed transitions for different defect
species shown in the right column, in both our single-defect and multi-defect analyses. Here, Elower is the chemical potential
corresponding to the lower bound of the experimental measurements, and ρlower is the experimental uncertainty near this
boundary.
B.
Sources of experimental and theoretical uncertainty
The likelihood functional makes use of estimates for both the experimental (ρi) and theoretical (σi) uncertainties,
where i = 1 to k enumerates the charging transitions of a given defect and k is determined by the defect species.
In Table 1 of the main text, we list the probabilities for assigning each of the identified defects to a particular
chemical species. As noted above, this is computed as the ratio of the likelihood for a given assignment, divided by
its maximum value.
The main theoretical uncertainties in the DFT calculations include the uncertainty in the band alignment between
tungsten and the aluminum oxide and the uncertainty of the bandgap energy for the aluminum oxide. The latter
arises from our approximate treatment of the oxide as crystalline, although it is actually amorphous. In this work,
we adopt a constant value of σi = 0.25 meV for all charging transitions.
The experimental uncertainty has several contributions, including uncertainties in our estimates for the fine tip
radius, the fine tip height, the height of the gold portion of the tip, and the big tip radius. As described in Sec. S2 C,
the quantities R and htip are interrelated, so their errors are also interrelated. (We give an example of this in the
caption of Table S3, discussing the uncertainty calculations for αd.) Similar relations apply to the quantities rapex
and hAu, as described in Sec. S2 D. Additional experimental uncertainty sources are the tip-sample separation, the
unknown defect depth, and the hysteresis of the charging transition voltages in the forward and backward bias sweeps.
Each of these sources contributes to the uncertainty of quantities appearing in Eq. (S5), as described in Table S3.
All of these effects are finally combined in quadrature to give the total experimental uncertainty:
ρ2
i = (∆αd)2(Vtransition −V∆Φ)2 + α2
d∆V 2
transition + α2
d∆V 2
∆Φ + (∆WW)2 + [∆Evac(rd)]2,
(S6)
which differs for each charging transition. Here, the ∆symbols indicate the error values for the various quantities.
Overall, we find that the first and fourth terms in Eq. (S6) tend to dominate, although all the terms play a role. For
the large-map scans (Sec. S4), we perform only one forward bias sweep and one backward bias sweep. In this case,
the experimental uncertainty is defined as the observed difference in the charging and discharging transition voltages
(i.e. the transition voltage hysteresis). For the high-resolution scans (Sec. S5 A), we perform multiple bias sweeps
in each direction for higher accuracy. We then compute the average charging and discharging voltages, the average
transition voltage Vtransition, and the corresponding standard deviation values ∆Vfwd and ∆Vbwd for each transition.
C.
Chemical species assignments
Our best guesses for the chemical species of Defects 1-5 are reported in Fig. 4 of the main text. In Fig. 4A,
the predicted transition energies for seven chemical species are shown with thick bars; color coding shows the
corresponding charge states. The same transition energies are shown as colored lines in the narrow bars on the right;
here, the surrounding colored boxes show the theoretical uncertainties, and the colors of these narrow bars establish
the color coding for the chemical species, which is used again in Fig. 4C. In Fig. 4A, we note that the narrow boxes
are only shown for transitions falling within the experimental measurement range.

===== Page 42 =====

42
In Fig. 4C, we illustrate the experimentally measured transitions for Defects 1-5. Here, the transition energies are
shown as black lines, while the experimental uncertainties are shown as gray boxes, and the experimental measurement
range is shown as open black boxes. To the right, we show our theoretical matches for the corresponding chemical
species, following the color coding of Fig. 4A. The first column of colored boxes shows our best match based on
the single-defect analysis while the second column shows the best match based on the multi-defect analysis. The
remaining Defects 8-20 are reported in the same manner in Figs. S34-S36.
S10.
COMPARING A 1D CAPACITOR MODEL TO REALISTIC DEVICE SIMULATIONS
In EFM experimental analyses, it is common to compute electrostatic interactions between the tip, sample, and
backgate. In cases where the dielectric material is thin and the tip is close to the sample surface, a 1D capacitor
model provides a reasonable approximation for the potential underneath the tip [62]. In this section, we show that
such 1D approximations yield very poor results for the thick sample used in our experiments, and that more-realistic
3D device simulations are needed.
For the 1D system, we consider the parallel-plate capacitor model shown in Fig. S37(a), where the vacuum, oxide,
and Si substrate layers are defined by their dielectric constants ϵvac = ϵ0, ϵox = 8.0ϵ0, and ϵSi = 11.4ϵ0, respectively,
and their corresponding layer thicknesses tvac, tox, and tSi. The resulting electrostatic potential as a function of
Quantity
Sources of
Uncertainty in
Total uncertainty
uncertainty
constituent quantities
of quantity
αd
Large tip radius and
0.001 eV/V
0.05 eV/V
fine tip height
Fine tip radius and
0.02 eV/V
gold height
Tip-sample separation
0.01 eV/V
Defect depth
0.05 eV/V
Evac(rd)
Large tip radius and
1e-6 eV
0.1 eV
fine tip height
Fine tip radius and
0.1 eV
gold height
Tip-sample
0.01 eV
separation
Defect depth
0.09 eV
Vtransition
Transition Voltage in forward sweep, Vfwd
Variable
For a single sweep:
|Vfwd −Vbwd|/2;
Transition Voltage in backward sweep, Vbwd
Variable
For multiple sweeps:
p
∆V 2
fwd + ∆V 2
bwd/2
V∆Φ
Variation
in
CPD
measured across sample surface
0.24 V
0.24 V
WW
Variation
in
CPD
measured against gold
0.1 eV
0.1 eV
Table S3.
Error estimates for quantities appearing in Eq. (S5). Column 1: the quantities with uncertainties. Column 2: the
sources of uncertainty considered here. Column 3: the computed uncertainty values. As an example, it was found in Sec. S2 C
that the big-tip radius is given by R = 1800 ± 200 nm. Furthermore, we can correlate uncertainties in R with errors in htip,
as seen in Fig. S9(b). We therefore compute αd as in Sec. S2 C by considering pairs of (R, htip) values, with R in the range
of 1600-2000 nm, yielding uncertainties in the lever arm of δαd = 0.001 eV/V, as shown in the first row of the table. We
also compute uncertainties in Evac in a similar fashion. The uncertainties in Vtransition are determined by the differences in
the values obtained between forward vs backward voltage sweeps, and they differ from pixel to pixel. They also depend on
whether the uncertainties are calculated for pixels where only a single voltage sweep is performed, or for pixels where multiple
sweeps are performed; the formulas used for each of these cases are shown in the next column. The uncertainty in V∆Φ is
defined as the standard deviation of the globally averaged CPD value, as discussed in Sec. S8. The uncertainty in WW is
determined as described in Fig. S5. Column 4: the total uncertainty of a given quantity is computed from the uncertainties in
column 3, combined in quadrature. Here, ∆Vfwd and ∆Vbwd refer to the uncertainties in the forward and backward transition
voltages observed in the high-resolution sweeps shown in Fig. S25.

===== Page 43 =====

43
Defects
6
7
8
9
10
Chemical potential, ∆ (eV)
Figure S34.
Chemical species identifications for Defects 6-10, using the same color codings as Fig. 4A and the same reporting
scheme as Fig. 4C. For each defect, the first column shows the experimentally determined charging energy ∆(black line), with
the corresponding experimental uncertainty level (gray box), and experimental measurement range (open black box). The
second column corresponds to our best theoretical match to the experimental data based on the single-defect analysis (colored
lines), with theoretical uncertainty levels shown (colored boxes). The third column corresponds to our best match based on
the multi-defect analysis. Note that some of the colored boxes, describing theoretical results, fall outside the experimental
measurement range, but are still shown here for completeness.
vertical position is then given by
V (z) =









= Vb
(tvac−z)ϵoxϵSi
tvacϵoxϵSi+toxϵvacϵSi+tSiϵvacϵox ,
(z ∈vacuum),
= Vb
tvacϵoxϵSi−zϵvacϵSi
tvacϵoxϵSi+toxϵvacϵSi+tSiϵvacϵox ,
(z ∈oxide),
= Vb
tvacϵoxϵSi+toxϵvacϵSi−(z+tox)ϵvacϵox
tvacϵoxϵSi+toxϵvacϵSi+tSiϵvacϵox
,
(z ∈Si),
(S7)
where z = 0 corresponds to the vacuum-oxide interface, as illustrated in Fig. S37(a). For the 3D model, we perform
COMSOL electrostatic simulations of the two-section tip described above, for the same sample, as illustrated in
Defects
11
12
13
14
15
Chemical potential, ∆ (eV)
Figure S35.
Chemical species identifications for Defects 11-15, using the same color codings as Fig. 4A and the same reporting
scheme as Fig. 4C. For each defect, the first column shows the experimentally determined charging energy ∆(black line), with
the corresponding experimental uncertainty level (gray box), and experimental measurement range (open black box). The
second column corresponds to our best theoretical match to the experimental data based on the single-defect analysis (colored
lines), with theoretical uncertainty levels shown (colored boxes). The third column corresponds to our best match based on
the multi-defect analysis. Note that some of the colored boxes, describing theoretical results, fall outside the experimental
measurement range, but are still shown here for completeness.

===== Page 44 =====

44
Defects
16
17
18
19
20
Chemical potential, ∆ (eV)
Figure S36.
Chemical species identifications for Defects 16-20, using the same color codings as Fig. 4A and the same reporting
scheme as Fig. 4C. For each defect, the first column shows the experimentally determined charging energy ∆(black line), with
the corresponding experimental uncertainty level (gray box), and experimental measurement range (open black box). The
second column corresponds to our best theoretical match to the experimental data based on the single-defect analysis (colored
lines), with theoretical uncertainty levels shown (colored boxes). The third column corresponds to our best match based on
the multi-defect analysis. Note that some of the colored boxes, describing theoretical results, fall outside the experimental
measurement range, but are still shown here for completeness.
Fig. S37(b). In both the 1D and 3D models, we ground the tip and apply a backgate voltage of Vb = 1 V.
We compare the 1D and 3D models in two sets of simulations. In Fig. S37(c), we set tvac = 0.1 nm and solve
the potential at a defect site, at location z = −d = −0.1 nm, directly below the tip. We then plot the potential
as a function of tsubstrate = tox + tSi on a Log10 scale, for tsubstrate ∈(1 nm, 381.06 µm), where the maximum value
corresponds to the actual size of our experimental sample. When tsubstrate ≤60 nm, we assume the substrate is
formed only of oxide material, by setting tSi = 0. When tsubstrate > 60 nm, we consider both oxide and Si materials
and set tox = 60 nm, noting that tox = 60 nm is the correct oxide thickness for our sample. The results of the
simulations show that the 1D model provides a reasonable approximation of the actual potential only for very thin
substrates, giving an error of about 30%. However for substrate thicknesses >100 nm, the 1D approximation is
already orders of magnitude too small.
A second set of simuations is shown in Fig. S38. Here, we plot the 1D and 3D electrostatic potentials obtained
Si
Oxide
Tip at 0 V
Backgate at Vb
tSi
tox
tvac
d
1D approximation
Si
Oxide
Backgate at Vb
3D simulation
Potential at d = 0.1nm in oxide 
 in 3D simulation (V)
Log10 tsubstrate (nm)
c
a
b
z
tsubstrate
Tip at 0 V
Figure S37.
Simulations of the electrostatic potential beneath an EFM tip, for 1D or 3D system geometries, sampled at a
fixed depth of d = 0.1 nm below the oxide interface. (a) The 1D geometry, modeled as a series of parallel-plate capacitors, as
described in Eq. (S7). (b) The 3D geometry, with a two-section EFM tip, as simulated by COMSOL. (c) 1D and 3D simulation
results as a function of the substrate thickness tsubstrate = tox + tSi. The results are plotted on a Log10 scale in the range
tsubstrate ∈(1 nm, 381.06 µm). We find that the 1D model underestimates the correct (3D) potential by orders of magnitude,
for realistically thick substrates. Note that the 3D solution shows a small kink at tsubstrate ≈30 nm. This marks the crossover
point where the wide portion of the tip begins to dominate over the thin portion of the tip.

===== Page 45 =====

45
0
Vertical displacement, z 
(nm)
(V)
Tip
Oxide
Oxide
Tip
1D approximation for thick 
substrate (381.06 𝜇m) (V)
3D simulation for thick 
substrate (381.06 𝜇m)
Vertical displacement, z (nm)
Potential (V)
x (nm)
x (nm)
Vertical displacement, z 
(nm)
Tip
1D approximation for thin 
substrate (10 nm)
(V)
(V)
3D simulation for thin 
substrate (10 nm)
Tip
Oxide
Oxide
Vertical displacement, z (nm)
Potential (V)
x (nm)
x (nm)
a
b
c
d
e
f
Potential down linecut 
through center of substrate 
Potential down linecut 
through center of substrate 
Vertical displacement, z 
(nm)
Vertical displacement, z 
(nm)
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
-10
0
-100000 -200000 -300000 -400000
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.2
0.0
Figure S38.
Simulations of the electrostatic potential beneath an EFM tip, for 1D or 3D system geometries. (a) Vertical
linecuts, as a function of position z, obtained directly below the tip, for a sample with a thin substrate, tsubstrate = 10 nm.
(b),(c) 2D solution cross-sections for the same geometry, as obtained for (b) the 1D model, or (c) the 3D model. Here, the
dashed line indicates the location of the linecut evaluated in (a). (d) Vertical linecuts, as a function of position z, obtained
directly below the tip, for a sample with a thick substrate, tsubstrate = 381.06 µm. (e),(f) 2D potential maps of the same
geometry, for (e) the 1D model, or (f) the 3D model. Again, the dashed line indicates the location of the linecut evaluated in
(d). As in Fig. S37, the 1D model is seen to greatly underestimate the potential.
directly below the tip, as a function of z, for two different sample geometries. In Figs. S38(a)-(c), we consider a
thin substrate tsubstrate = 10 nm. In Figs. S38(d)-(f), we consider a thick substrate with tsubstrate = 381.06 µm. In
all cases, we set tvac = 0.5 nm. Panels (b), (c), (e), and (f) show 2D cross-sections of the potential, while (a) and
(d) show vertical linecuts directly below the tip. Again, the results demonstrate that the 1D approximation vastly
underestimates the potential, except for z values very near the backgate. The results are especially poor for thick
substrates.
S11.
MATCHING MULTIPLE TRANSITIONS TO A SINGLE DEFECT
In Sec. S9, we described a method for matching one or more charging transitions, observed at a given pixel, to one
ore more defects, using a likelihood analysis and theoretical predictions for the charging energies. In this section, we
describe an alternative method, based on an analysis of the charging map itself.
The method focuses on the correlations between the hysteresis observed in charging transitions on neighboring
pixels. To demonstrate this method, Fig. S39(a) shows a map of the lowest-voltage charging transitions for Defect
13, with the predicted center of the defect shown as a red cross. Figure S39(b) shows the f-V sweeps for this center
pixel, and the eight surrounding pixels. For reference, in all the plots, the vertical dashed lines show the charging
transitions for the center pixel. As the EFM tip is moved away from the center pixel, changes in the hysteresis
provide a probe of the tip-defect separation, due to the exponential decay of tip-defect tunneling with distance.
Thus, if two different charging transitions originate from the same defect, we would expect them both to exhibit a
larger hysteresis on the neighboring pixels. This is precisely the behavior observed in Fig. S39(b), indicating that
both transitions belong to the same defect. In this case, this provides strong evidence that the defect should be
classified as the defect species VO, which has two transitions in the experimental voltage range. In comparison, the
second-best classification from our previous likelihood analysis suggests two closely separated CAl-H defects with
charging transitions that are shifted by different local electrostatic environments. The hysteresis analysis, given

===== Page 46 =====

46
a
b
3.2
3.4
3.6
3.8
Charging Voltage (V)
0
1
2
11
12
13
14
x (nm)
y (nm)
Tip-backgate bias (V)
Tip-backgate bias (V)
Tip-backgate bias (V)
Frequency shift 
(Hz)
Frequency shift 
(Hz)
Frequency shift 
(Hz)
Figure S39.
A study of the hysteresis correlations in the charging transitions on neighboring pixels. (a) A map of the
lowest-voltage charging transitions observed in the forward f-V voltage sweep for Defect 13. The red cross shows the center
of the defect, as determined in Sec. S4. (b) f-V forward (blue) and backward (orange) voltage sweeps for Defect 13, measured
at the center pixel (red cross) and on the eight neighboring pixels. Two pairs of charging transitions are observed at the center
pixel, as indicated by vertical dashed lines. The same dashed lines (from the center pixel) are shown on all the plots, for
reference. Greater-or-equal hysteresis is observed for the same pairs of charging transitions in all the surrounding pixels, as
compared to the center pixel, indicating that both transitions are centered at the same pixel (red cross), and that, with high
likelihood, they originate from the same defect.
above, confirms that the CAl-H classification is less likely.
Although we do not make further use of this hysteresis-based approach here, we hope to explore it in future work.
This points to untapped information available in the hysteresis data.
