

===== Page 1 =====

FPIC: A Novel Semantic Dataset for Optical PCB Assurance
NATHAN JESSURUN, OLIVIA P. DIZON-PARADIS, JACOB HARRISON, SHAJIB GHOSH, MARK
M. TEHRANIPOOR, DAMON L. WOODARD, and NAVID ASADIZANJANI, University of Florida, USA
Outsourced printed circuit board (PCB) fabrication necessitates increased hardware assurance capabilities. Several assurance techniques
based on automated optical inspection (AOI) have been proposed that leverage PCB images acquired using digital cameras. We review
state-of-the-art AOI techniques and observe a strong, rapid trend toward machine learning (ML) solutions. These require significant
amounts of labeled ground truth data, which is lacking in the publicly available PCB data space. We contribute the FICS PCB Image
Collection (FPIC) dataset to address this need. Additionally, we outline new hardware security methodologies enabled by our data set.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Automated Optical Inspection, PCB, Dataset, Semantic Segmentation, Hardware Assurance
ACM Reference Format:
Nathan Jessurun, Olivia P. Dizon-Paradis, Jacob Harrison, Shajib Ghosh, Mark M. Tehranipoor, Damon L. Woodard, and Navid
Asadizanjani. 2023. FPIC: A Novel Semantic Dataset for Optical PCB Assurance. In . ACM, New York, NY, USA, 22 pages. https:
//doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
1
INTRODUCTION
PCBs are key components of many modern electronic systems, from computers and mobile phones in the private
sector to military and medical devices in the public sector. As outsourced manufacturing becomes increasingly common,
electronic systems are left vulnerable to supply chain threats like malicious modification, reverse engineering and
IP theft, and counterfeiting [1, 2, 3, 4]. Subsequently, malicious entities with even minor supply chain access can
severely compromise national security through Trojan insertions and related device modifications. Hence, techniques
for auditing PCB correctness and component authenticity are needed. Due to its favorable trade-offs between speed,
accuracy, and cost compared to X-Ray and other wavelengths, optical inspection of PCB components stands out as a
promising inspection modality [5].
Since defects and Trojans are often highly complex, computer vision (CV) solutions alone cannot provide robust
system-level assurance. Hence, optical solutions are trending toward artificial intelligence (AI) and ML methods for a
generalizable, scalable approach. Outside of PCB analysis, most AI/ML developments occur in domains with numerous
large datasets such as medical imaging, aerial imaging, generic object recognition, etc. Unfortunately, the same is not
true for optical PCB assurance – remarkably few datasets are publicly available, and each possesses a relatively small
number of images compared to other domains [6]. Transfer learning seems promising for mitigating this lack of large
PCB data set, but it requires similarities between the source and target datasets. PCB data varies significantly from
datasets like PascalVOC and ImageNet which are staples in other fields – this complicates the use of transfer learning
to bootstrap larger datasets. As a result, there is a critical lack of available PCB data to train AI/ML solutions for robust
PCB assurance.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to
redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2023 Association for Computing Machinery.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
1
arXiv:2202.08414v2  [cs.CV]  14 Mar 2023

===== Page 2 =====

JETC ’23, XXX XXX 2023, XX, XX
Jessurun et al.
We contribute the FICS1 PCB Image Collection (FPIC) dataset to address this deficiency. First, FPIC contains
more unique PCB images with labeled instances than any prior work in the PCB assurance domain. Further, it
includes novel metadata such as semantic annotation boundaries and component-to-silkscreen correlations. Some
representative annotations are shown in Figure 1. Finally, this paper outlines several ways the FPIC dataset provides
a unique groundwork for advancing hardware assurance techniques. The dataset is available at https://www.trusthub.org/#/data/pcb-images. Critically, this dataset will grow over time to continually expand its breadth of PCB coverage.
Regular updates are already planned for the next 12 months, with more contributions anticipated from the community
once semi-automated data collection is fully enabled.
Fig. 1. Representative text and surface-mount device (SMD) annotations. Precise contours, logo, text, and orientation information is
captured along with additional metadata as described in Section 3.
Section 2 discusses relevant threats to PCBs, argues that optical imaging is a promising solution, and explains the
trend toward ML solutions to this problem. Section 3 discusses the newly collected FPIC dataset and fundamental optical
PCB assurance challenges encountered through its development. Section 4 outlines methodological considerations
resulting from the data collection procedure and hardware assurance ramifications. In Section 5, FPIC’s ramifications
on state-of-the-art techniques are proposed, and how its data will propel the field of optical PCB assurance forward.
Finally, Section 6 concludes with remarks about how the dataset will continue to grow and impact the field of AOI.
2
BACKGROUND
Most aspects of cost-effective PCB assembly (PCBA) assurance center around AOI capabilities. The following
subsections outline what threats are relevant, why this method is a popular approach toward a solution, and how AOI
approaches trend toward machine learning tactics over time. The section concludes with a description of the datasets
enabling ML-based AOI.
1Florida Institute for Cybersecurity Research (FICS)
2

===== Page 3 =====

FPIC: A Novel Semantic Dataset for Optical PCB Assurance
JETC ’23, XXX XXX 2023, XX, XX
2.1
Threats to PCBAs
Optical assurance has been proposed for identifying counterfeit and maliciously-modified (“trojan”) components and
PCBAs. Automated optical inspection also has applications for PCBA reverse-engineering.
The term counterfeit describes components and assemblies that are either a) misrepresented by suppliers as having
different function, parameters, or performance or b) produced illegitimately, e.g., from stolen intellectual property
(IP).2 Counterfeit electronics siphon revenue from legitimate manufacturers and threaten the reliability and security of
electronic systems [4, 8, 7].
Trojan hardware contains intentional malicious modifications that compromise confidentiality of sensitive information,
system integrity or performance, or cause denial of service. Trojan integrated circuits have been extensively investigated,
but attacks at the board-level have only recently garnered attention. Unlike integrated circuits (ICs), which are assumed
vulnerable only during manufacturing due to challenges of IC editing, PCBAs are vulnerable to both manufacturing-time
modifications (e.g., the electromigration modification proposed by [9]) and post-manufacturing attacks (e.g., video
game modchips [10] and implants from the NSA ANT catalog [2]).
Automated PCBA inspection has also been proposed to assist reverse engineering, e.g., by automatically extracting
a PCBA’s bill of materials (BoM). Imaging-assisted reverse engineering could be used for good by helping repair or
replace obsolete equipment or contribute to assurance, or for evil by cloning or pirating legitimate PCBs [11].
2.2
Automated optical inspection & AI/ML
While some methods for hardware assurance have existed since the beginning of the digital age, other techniques
have only grown popular in recent years due to increased computing power and advancements in AI. The sections
below outline trends in the inspection process, and their relevance toward current inspection capabilities.
2.2.1
Overview. AOI is one of the oldest and most common methods for PCB assurance, with some of the earliest
references in the 1960s [12, 5]. However, preliminary efforts were largely confined to pre-assembly inspection and
photomask evaluation. As a result, aspects like surface-mount device (SMD) solder/placement inspection and counterfeit
analysis were not considered. Furthermore, optical inspection was limited by several constraints including hard-coded
specifications, limited-area inspection, and significant amounts of manual intervention [5, 13, 14]. Though exponential
improvements in computing power alleviated some of these concerns, subject matter experts (SMEs) still played a
prominent role in the process. As a result, despite several decades of published research on various aspects of AOI, fully
integrated PCBA inspection remained heavily unexplored. Fortunately, recent developments in machine learning toward
image recognition, defect detection, segmentation, localization, and more in other domains have been successfully
translated to hardware assurance purposes, bridging several of these gaps.
The relevance and drawbacks of these AI advancements change depending on whether assurance is performed with
known genuine reference samples, as highlighted below. However, both mechanisms share the goal of characterizing
fundamental aspects of given regions of interest, such as component type, (i.e. IC, resistor, capacitor, etc.) defect type
(i.e. short, bridge, cavity, etc.), silkscreen / text information, etc. [15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22].
Component Inspection. Several works have considered how optical inspection could be used to spot defects caused
by harsh counterfeiting processes. For example, in recycling, which is believed to be a leading source of counterfeit
parts [23], workers heat PCBAs to melt solder and then pry, yank, or beat components off of PCBs. Harvested parts
may be washed in the river, laid on the ground to dry, and thrown haphazardly into bins [4]. Guin et al. enumerate
2See [7] for a detailed counterfeit electronics taxonomy.
3

===== Page 4 =====

JETC ’23, XXX XXX 2023, XX, XX
Jessurun et al.
physical defects from recycling and other counterfeiting processes [23]. In practice, subject matter experts search
for these defects [4, 24] but manual inspection is unscalable; application of computer vision and machine learning to
automatically find evidence of counterfeiting is a topic of active research. An alternative approach aims to uniquely
identify components using optical inspection. For example, Wu et al. also use an automated approach to identify
components beyond tolerance for lead placement, orientation, and more [25].
Assembly inspection. Rigorous detection of bogus PCBAs [8, 26] has received relatively little attention. Generally,
unsophisticated counterfeits can be spotted by discrepancies between genuine and suspect systems (e.g., [27, 28]). A few
whole-PCBA automated inspection projects are under development [29] but are immature. X-ray analysis of bare PCBs
has been proposed but cannot be applied to assemblies because mounted components cause x-ray artifacts [30]. Often,
optical PCBA assurance reduces to inspection of individual components. However, note that when the entire PCB image
is wholly evaluated, rather than regional subsets, there is no need to individually identify surface-mounted components.
This occurs in quality assurance processes when the entire PCB can be considered defective or non-defective rather
than distinguishing integrity at the component level [31, 32].
2.2.2
AOI Using Golden Samples. When a known authentic PCBA (a “golden" sample) is available, defect and trojan
analysis mainly consists of differential comparisons between the sample under test and the golden counterpart. Any
change in optical characteristics between the two can be attributed either to environmental effects or component/board
alterations. Because of its scalability, low cost, efficiency, and accuracy, this differential approach is the most popular form
of AOI [5]. These inspections can take place at both the component and assembly level, incorporating information from
computer-aided design (CAD) schematics and other available domain knowledge. In most cases, a test sample is aligned
against the golden reference, features are extracted, and a comparison or feature classification is performed between
the golden and test samples. Resulting classification differences indicate deviations between golden and test samples.
For instance, De Oliviera et al. discovered modifications made to fuel pump controller PCBs by identifying differences
between reference and modified samples using SIFT features and a support vector machine (SVM) classifier [33].
Zhao et al. used a machine vision system to locate known optical test points in an online fashion to perform sample
inspection. Once the correct location is identified, feature extraction and pattern matching are performed as previously
described [34]. Wang et al. analyzed the correlation coefficient between reference and test samples to identify scratches
and other defects on IC surfaces [35].
2.2.3
AOI without Golden Samples. The benefits of golden sample-based AOI are significant, but genuine PCBAs are
often not available. When boards are past their supported life span (as is common for long-term government/military
applications), highly customized, poorly documented, or of unknown origin, there is often little to no information
available about the board, let alone golden images for differential image analysis. Alternative assurance methods must
be employed to achieve necessary results. In contrast to golden-based AOI, these methods must localize / characterize
regions of interest and extrapolate relevant information in place of differential analysis. This is typically performed
using a machine learning backbone and significant amounts of labeled data, as shown in Figure 2.
Component identification is responsible for analyzing previously acquired results and making an assurance assessment. During this process, elements of the physical sample are compared to ideal design standards to find likely
evidence of manipulation or defects. In this manner, while the precise metrics for a genuine sample are not known
beforehand, evidence of tampering will appear as regions which violate design rule checks (DRCs), fall outside Institute
for Interconnecting and Packaging Electronic Circuits (IPC) standards, do not correspond to a logical netlist/BoM
extraction, or exhibit related deviations from expected behavior. In this vein, AutoBoM is a proposed framework which
4

===== Page 5 =====

FPIC: A Novel Semantic Dataset for Optical PCB Assurance
JETC ’23, XXX XXX 2023, XX, XX
Image Acquisition
Domain Knowledge
Annotation
Knowledge Database
Detection
Classification
Identification / Inspection
Automated
Inputs
Human-in-the-loop
Fig. 2. Overview of the stages present in most PCBA assurance workflows. Note the strong dependence on a wide variety of database
samples and domain knowledge / experience.
attempts to leverage this information, creating a tentative BoM from optically gleaned information and comparing it to
known general component properties [29]. Lin et al. employ a coupled system of optical character recognition (OCR)
and image analysis to identify ICs with clear and blurry text in PCB images [36].
As described earlier, datasets play a critical role in the quality of machine learning-based assurance methods.
Increasingly complex methods are developed for golden-less AOI, but these techniques are heavily stunted without
prior growth in the associated datasets. Thus, a discussion of currently available datasets provides reasonable insight
into how robust current methods can be expected to perform and how much room for model architecture growth exists.
2.3
Existing Datasets
Several publications introduce datasets useful for AOI/ML methods, each highlighting different aspects of optical
PCB inspection. While some focus on surface-mount devices, others provide information on connectivity such as traces
and vias. The datasets are grouped into two categories below based on whether they are publicly accessible, ordered by
the year they were introduced. These are summarized in addition to the proposed FPIC dataset in Table 1.
Notably, there are far fewer datasets for PCB assurance than standard computer vision solutions, such as cell counting,
aerial photos, and generic image segmentation [37]. This is a critical issue for a field like hardware assurance, since
significant data is one of the few robust mechanisms to combat a dynamically evolving environment [5]. As of 2021,
the largest publicly available datasets consist of at most 165 PCB samples and at most 8,016 unique SMD annotations
(PCB-DSLR and WACV respectively, see Section 3). As a consequence, this increase in ML applications for PCB assurance
without corresponding levels of data does not equate to increased reliability and confidence metrics. These concerns can
be addressed either with smaller ML architectures or larger amounts of ground truth data. While data augmentation can
partially address this issue, a large set of unique, representative data is essential for generalizable assurance, especially
when tested on deep neural networks [38].
2.3.1
Publicly Available. CD-PCB (2021) [31]. Fridman et al. provide 17 image pairs where each set contains images
with and without synthetic defects. This dataset can provide insight into the general, board-level characteristics of
defective samples.
5

===== Page 6 =====

JETC ’23, XXX XXX 2023, XX, XX
Jessurun et al.
Amazon lookout (2021) [32]. Ganapathy and Gupta demonstrate an AWS workflow to identify anomalous versus
normal PCBs based on high-resolution optical images. Without instance-level labels, usability is constrained to high-level
defect detection and general characteristic analysis. Nonetheless, they demonstrate reasonable accuracy in discriminating
normal and anomalous samples with a given machine learning model.
IC-ChipNet (2020) [39]. Reza and Crandall present a curated bank of over 6,000 IC images. While they do not provide
general text annotations, each IC is labeled with its manufacturer and several unique logos per manufacturer are
represented. This dataset is useful for fine-grained retrieval, recognition, and verification of IC images.
PCBExperiment (2020) [40]. Not associated with a specific publication or method, this publicly available dataset
consists of several hundred defective and non-defective PCB samples. Its category depends on whether it passed a
manual quality assurance check. Similar to Amazon Lookout above, no other annotations or instance-level attributes
are defined in this dataset. However, as with CD-PCB it can be useful for generalizing traits of poor-quality boards or
defective samples.
FICS-PCB (2020) [17]. Over 400 images were collected of 31 PCB samples in this work. A combined total of 30,000
SMD bounding boxes are present across these duplicate images, with several pieces of metadata associated with each
component. More information is visible in Table 1. The comprehensive data collected is useful for a variety of purposes,
including resolution requirement analysis, component localization & classification, and character recognition.
WACV (2019) [41]. Kuo et al. provide one of the first public datasets with board text annotations. With over 6,000
component annotations and 10,000 text annotations across 41 PCB images, they allow for a dynamic array of new
machine learning tasks in addition to component detection and localization.
HRIPCB (2019) [22]. Huang and Wei present this dataset containing 10 PCB images with multiple synthetic defects. In
each case, bounding box annotations around each defect location are provided. Compared to [40, 31], these annotations
provide more precise and detailed information about defect compositions.
PCB-DSLR (2015) [37]. One of the first public PCB datasets, Pramerdorfer and Kampel paved the way for machine
learning applications with this contribution. The dataset contains 165 unique PCBs and over 2,000 labeled IC instances
with text data for a small subset. More images are captured in different orientations, increasing the size of data when
label repetitions are considered.
2.3.2
Out-of-Scope. Several additional works highlight datasets that either are not publicly available or do not directly
handle PCB/SMD images. [42] presents a sizable dataset of PCB images at a production plant and labels “coresets” of
OCR characters, which are building blocks for more flexible text-based model training. No public link is given, but the
authors note in [43] that data is available upon request. DEEP-PCB (2019) provides a dataset of annotated substrate
defects. Images consist of post-thresholding via/trace masks rather than the raw optical data [44]. A dataset of google
images seeded by PCB-DSLR is presented by Chen et al. [45], but this curated and annotated list of images is not
publicly available. [46] collects multimodal data including infrared (IR) and visible images of PCB defects, but is not
publicly accessible. [47] demonstrates the performance of a new YOLO (v5) architecture specifically designed to locate
tiny defects in high-resolution quality-control PCB images. PCB-METAL presents a large dataset of high-resolution
PCB images similar to FICS-PCB, but there is no public link to the data and fewer representative component types are
labeled [48].
6

===== Page 7 =====

FPIC: A Novel Semantic Dataset for Optical PCB Assurance
JETC ’23, XXX XXX 2023, XX, XX
3
FPIC DATASET
As noted previously, the FPIC dataset was developed to address data availability bottlenecks in ML-based AOI
methods. The dataset consists of 261 images of 93 separate PCBs. Note that more images exist than physical PCB
samples since both front and back images can be acquired, and some PCBs are photographed in multiple settings. Both
text and mounted components are annotated where applicable in most images, resulting in over 71,000 annotated
instances. PCB samples were purchased online or disassembled from a variety of different devices, e.g. computer hard
drive controllers, servers, and audio amplifiers. An example image with annotations is shown in Figure 3. FPIC’s creation
and the rationale for included metadata is explained in the following subsections. Critically, this dataset will continue
to grow larger over time as more samples are cataloged and annotated.
Fig. 3. Sample annotated PCB. The image has roughly 4,000 text instances and 1,500 SMD instances.
FPIC’s dataset statistics in comparison to other works is shown in Table 1, though fairly comparing FPIC to prior
datasets is deceptively challenging. Comparing quantity of ground truth annotations between datasets requires that a
distinction be made between unique and total instances: one PCB might be photographed and annotated four times, but
only one set of those annotations provide new information because the remaining three images are simply geometric
transforms of the first. Machine learning algorithms must be careful to distinguish between these when using training
sets, otherwise they risk treating augmentations as unseen samples. In an effort to compare datasets as fairly as possible,
Table 1 lists both the total and unique annotation quantities for datasets with duplicate annotations.
3.1
Imaging
Images were taken in controlled conditions with a Nikon D850 DSLR camera. A two-second delay mitigated camera
shake during acquisition, and a two-second exposure reduced image noise. Each time the camera position or zoom
7

===== Page 8 =====

JETC ’23, XXX XXX 2023, XX, XX
Jessurun et al.
Dataset 
# PCBs / 
# Images 
# Manual 
Annotations 
Annotation Type 
FPIC 
(Proposed) 
97 / 271 
Device: 
52,582 total, 
24,025 unique 
Text: 23,218 
Device: 
 Semantic boundaries 
 Designator 
Text: 
 Component locator 
 Text orientation 
 Bounding box 
 Logo 
 Board/device text 
CD-PCB 
(2021) 
17 / 34 
N/A 
 Difference mask of 
synthetic defects per image 
Amazon Lookout
(2021) 
80 / 80 
N/A 
 Anomaly/normal 
classification 
IC-ChipNet 
(2020) 
N/A 
6,387 
 Manufacturer 
FICS-PCB 
(2020) 
31 / 418 
30,317 total*,
6,865 unique 
 Device bounding boxes 
 6 Component types 
 Component text 
 Logo presence/absence 
PCBExperiment 
(2020) 
386 / 386 
N/A 
 Defective/non-defective 
classification
WACV 
(2019) 
32 / 47 
Device: 8,016 
Text: 10,185 
 Device bounding boxes 
 Board text bounding boxes 
 31 Component types 
 Component text 
 Board text
HRIPCB 
(2019) 
10 / 1,386 
2,953 
 6 defect types 
PCB-DSLR 
(2015) 
165 / 165 
2,048* 
 IC bounding boxes 
 IC text for 365 instances
Table 1. Summary of PCB datasets in AOI / machine learning literature. Underlined fields are annotation types introduced for the
first time in PCB dataset literature.
* More annotations are present in the downloadable dataset, but they are simple geometric transforms of the number stated in this
table. FICS-PCB lists 77,347 annotations but has several copies of the same microscope annotations applied to different imaging
conditions. PCB-DSLR lists 9,313 annotations but uses several rotated versions of the same 2,048 annotations.
changed, a calibration photo of an X-Rite Passport or Nano Color Checker was collected to normalize colors across
changing environmental conditions (e.g., photographs taken with different amounts of natural light). A portion of the
dataset consists of the same PCB samples imaged under several illumination and camera sensor parameters to study the
effects of normalization [49].
Each image in the database consists of a single photograph rather than a stitched sequence of tiles. While image
stitching is common to increase resolution, it introduces defects such as distortion / warping, imperfect alignment,
and noise at stitching boundaries. A thorough investigation of these defects can be found in [17]. FPIC optimizes for
minimal processing and noise reduction at the expense of lower resolution for very large samples.
3.2
Contour Annotation
Collected images were processed using S3A (https://gitlab.com/s3a/s3a) and SuperAnnotate (www.superannotate.
com). The SuperAnnotate service was responsible for creating high-fidelity semantic outlines around components in
a subset of PCB images as well as creating bounding boxes around device and board text. A significant number of
images were annotated in-house using S3A, where assistance algorithms such as GrabCut and K-Means segmentation
simplified this process. All contours (bounding box or otherwise) are represented as lists of polygons indicating either
holes or foreground areas.
8

===== Page 9 =====

FPIC: A Novel Semantic Dataset for Optical PCB Assurance
JETC ’23, XXX XXX 2023, XX, XX
3.3
Metadata Annotation
Once gathered, component and text boundaries were loaded into S3A where the remaining metadata (Text, Logo,
Designator, etc.) was added locally. Since complex SMD contours were extraordinarily time-consuming to obtain, the
only additional metadata associated with these instances was the “Designator": silkscreen board text containing the
component identifier such as ‘C’, ‘L’, ‘R’, etc. If no designator was present, instead of attempting to infer the proper label,
we opted not to assign a label to avoid adding potentially incorrect component labels. Figure 4 illustrates one scenario
where similar-looking components could easily be misidentified if annotators tried to guess component identity instead
of relying only on designators.
Fig. 4. A thermistor, two inductors, ferrite bead, and a capacitor which all share similar visual characteristics. Non-SME annotators
may easily confuse the component type without assistance from silkscreen designators.
3.4
Validation
Each file underwent two rounds of manual validation and a logical check to minimize the number of human errors
present in the final version. The logical check programmatically searched for edge cases such as replicated components
in the same file, duplicate metadata, strongly overlapping regions, and other factors usually indicative of errors during
annotation.
Unlike SMD components, OCR instances have a host of associated metadata, including some fields that are present
for the first time in PCB dataset literature. These are summarized in Table 2.
Metadata 
Description 
Sample Values 
Component 
Locator 
Nx2 (x,y) coordinates of associated SMD 
components 
[[500, 1000], [510, 10000]] indicates 
two associated components 
Class 
Whether this text is on PCB substrate or an 
SMD 
“Board”, “Device” 
Text 
ASCII and latex letters contained in the 
annotation boundaries 
“R201”, “PWR”, “\Sigma”, etc. 
Logo 
Manufacturer of the logo contained in the 
annotation boundaries
“Texas Instruments”, “Advanced 
Micro Devices”, etc.
Orientation 
Orientation of the characters contained in the 
annotation boundaries with respect to the 
horizontal (positive x) axis
Integer in range [0, 359]. e.g. 0, 30, 
45, 60, 359 
Notes 
Additional notes from the annotator either 
indicating unsure values or defect descriptions 
“Defect:Misprint”, 
“Orientation:Unsure”, etc. 
 
 
Table 2. Metadata collected during text annotation
9

===== Page 10 =====

JETC ’23, XXX XXX 2023, XX, XX
Jessurun et al.
3.5
Database insertion
The FPIC dataset is stored on TrustHub; Table 3 summarizes the database’s directory structure. Beyond metadata
for labeled instances, each image is associated with scale information to enable measurement of physical dimensions
based on pixel counts, a color checker, and a camera model. The first 150 images in FPIC use the same PCB samples at
different scales to evaluate the effects of resolution on component detectability as done in [17].
Beyond color and scale calibration parameters, over three-fourths of the PCB samples also possess a brief functional
description, i.e. “Honeywell 14500144-001 Module PLC PCB Board". This information enables searching for documents
like data sheets or CAD files if desired.
Folder 
Description 
pcb_image
Optical images of each PCB surface and rear, tagged with a unique identifier. 
Each image name also indicates which color checker should be used for 
normalization if desired.
color_checker
Palette to account for environmental illumination factors as well as a scale 
reference for the photo resolution. One color checker image may be used to 
normalize multiple PCB images in the event each is taken in the same 
environment.
ocr_annotation
Optical Character Recognition annotations. This includes polygon boundaries 
around all relevant text on a PCB image. Whether the piece of text is on the 
board or a device, whether it is a logo or not, orientation, and more are noted 
within the columns of the csv.
smd_annotation
Surface-mount Device (SMD) annotations. This includes polygon boundaries 
around all relevant SMD devices such as resistors, capacitors, inductors, 
transistors, diodes, LEDs, and more. Along with each component, its 
associated silkscreen designator ('L', 'R', 'C', 'U', etc.) is recorded.
vtp_annotation
Vias, traces, and pins (VTP) annotations. These are regions of connectivity 
between SMDs on a PCB. Few annotations currently exist, this is considered 
in 'beta' mode currently.
metadata
Holds two files corresponding to information about image files. 
 pcb.csv: holds information about the physical PCB samples such as their 
color, online item description, and any notes. 
 color_checker.csv: indicates the pixels per millimeter (ppmm) of any image 
associated with that color checker, whether an X-Rite ColorChecker 
Passport or Nano was used, what camera performed the acquisition, and any 
relevant notes.
Table 3. Description of each folder present in the Trust-Hub hosted FPIC dataset. All annotation and metadata are stored as CSV
files, while images are in PNG format.
4
METHODOLOGICAL INSIGHTS
After years of data collection, we learned important lessons as a result of sample diversity, variance between
annotators, and acquisition volume. The metadata collected by FPIC (namely, semantic contours and silkscreen-tocomponent association) that was not included in prior work also yielded useful insights. These are explained in
the following paragraphs, separated into imaging and logistical categories. Each subsection provides a handful of
recommendations for improving future data collection.
10

===== Page 11 =====

FPIC: A Novel Semantic Dataset for Optical PCB Assurance
JETC ’23, XXX XXX 2023, XX, XX
Examples 
(Reference PCB) 
Sample Images 
Notes 
Occlusion 
(85f, 42f) 
 How is the “correct” ground 
truth determined? 
 Should context be used to 
fill in occluded text? 
 Is the interpolated data 
defect-free / unaltered? 
Reflection 
(49b, 8f) 
 Should reflected text be 
annotated as text? 
 Can violate several 
assumptions about 
component characteristics 
Mounted status 
(152f) 
 Difficult to distinguish but 
critical to correctly identify 
during optical assurance 
 Usually resolved with higher 
imaging resolution 
Optical masking 
(120f, 118f, 
142f) 
 Cases where large portions 
of the board are obscured 
must be correctly detected to 
prevent attackers from 
obscuring relevant 
information 
Varying profiles 
(180b, 150f) 
 What is this component’s 
shape? It changes depending 
on how the leads are bent. 
BoM analysis of component 
characteristics must take this 
into account to be accurate 
 
 
Table 4. Overview of challenges faced by image acquisition parameters. In other words, it is possible to alleviate some of these
concerns by altering various aspects of the imaging setup.
4.1
Imaging challenges
Imaging challenges include imaging irregularities and particularities that can be resolved by altering the image
acquisition setup. The examples below illustrate cases where artifacts of the imaging process alter ground truth markings
depending on the details present in annotation instructions and annotator skill.
Occluded components and markings. Some, but not all, occluded components and markings can be revealed by slightly
adjusting the angle from the sample to the camera. Many markings that would be valuable for assurance, e.g., polarity
markers, component symbols, or designators, are located directly beneath mounted components to assist in manual
assembly or rework. Unfortunately, it is usually impossible to completely image these markings even when multiple
camera angles are considered.The top row of Table 4 illustrates this challenge. When considering occluded components,
the output segmentation often varies across annotators since some may consider only the visible portion of a device
while others will extrapolate its position.
Reflective components and conformal coating. Reflections also negatively impact the ease of annotation and feature
detection. Conformal coating is typically applied to PCBAs requiring environmental hardening, resulting in a sheen
across short components. This effect is stronger with direct lighting. As a result, it can be difficult to determine the
true color or shape of the covered device, leading to misclassification or poor boundaries. Additionally, direct lighting
11

===== Page 12 =====

JETC ’23, XXX XXX 2023, XX, XX
Jessurun et al.
across tall components can reflect bright areas of the board resulting in artifacts like the right side of row 2. Note
that annotation instructions do not often outline a procedure for these cases, so artifacts may appear as ground truth
annotations when working with low-cost or minimal QA annotation pipelines. However, applying a polarized filter to
the camera can greatly reduce these specular side effects. If more control can be gained over the imaging environment,
these effects can also be mitigated through precise lighting or stereophotographic acquisition.
Ambiguity between mounted/unmounted pads. Components that share colors with the PCB substrate complicate the
distinction between populated vs. unpopulated solder pads. As a result, annotators can mistake the two and increase
the difficulty in training a neural network to locate SMDs. Row 3 illustrates the difference between a green SMD and
silkscreen between empty pads. Note that the depicted example is straightforward to resolve due to the high-resolution
image, but a low-resolution counterpart greatly increases the difficulty. Two simple methods exist for increasing
resolution: adjusting the zoom or exposure time of the image. While increasing the zoom is often preferable, it can lead
to more artifacts if image stitching is required as a result. Alternatively, increasing exposure time cuts down on some
forms of sensor noise but cannot resolve all forms of resolution-based complexity.
Masked PCB areas. While the first category addressed individually occluded components, another frequent scenario
involves large swaths of a PCB covered by various objects like heat sinks, stickers, daughterboards, etc. Depending on
the threat model, this eases a malicious actor’s difficulty inserting untrusted components since they can be trivially
covered as seen in row 4. Thus, robust inspection mechanisms must determine a way to identify areas of the board
likely to contain components masked by a secondary object. A minor amount of sample preparation can avoid several
of these concerns. By removing stickers and disconnecting daughter boards before imaging, large amounts of previously
obscured circuitry will become visible. When removal is not possible (e.g. heat sinks and daughter boards which must
remain attached), subsurface imaging such as X-Ray can be incorporated.
Widely varying component profiles. When components have long leads (i.e. transistors, diodes, crystal oscillators,
etc.), they can be contorted into a variety of shapes as viewed from the top down. In these cases, similar to occluded
component scenarios, width/length annotations from the top-down object view do not correspond to width/length
values from a BoM reference. Annotating additional metadata, such as the location of leads in the image, can assist in
determining whether component height, width, or length should be matched to the visible dimensions in the optical
image.
4.2
Logistical insights
In contrast to imaging challenges, the following discussion about methodological logistics does not depend on image
quality or other environmental factors. Rather, these are fundamental characteristics of an annotation and assurance
workflow that attempts to use flowchart rules to encode human design insights. Each heading illustrates the difficulties
of correlating silkscreen information with PCB design characteristics.
Greatly separated designators and SMDs. Ideally, designators are close to their associated components and unlikely
to be confused with neighboring designators. However, this is not the case in densely populated PCB regions where
component real estate imposes stringent requirements. In these scenarios, several designators are grouped together,
placed in an open area on the board, and ‘linked’ in some manner to a corresponding group of components as shown in
Table 5 row 1. The way in which links are formed depends entirely on the PCB designer; cluster labels, arrows, and
orientation matching are common approaches, but there are others. These common approaches enable development of
heuristics that may be able to associate designators with components in the common case, but as long as designator
placement remains a stylistic decision it will be difficult to confidently automate associations.
12

===== Page 13 =====

FPIC: A Novel Semantic Dataset for Optical PCB Assurance
JETC ’23, XXX XXX 2023, XX, XX
Examples 
(Reference PCB) 
Sample Image(s) 
Notes 
Greatly separated 
designators and SMDs 
(101f) 
 
 Non-trivial to automatically 
associate silkscreen annotations to 
parts – requires a special heuristic 
Reference designator 
agglomeration 
(113f, 36f, 1f) 
 
 
 Silkscreen is often lain in an 
irregular manner 
 Results in one-to-many and manyto-one relationships between 
components and designators 
Run-on designator 
clusters / markings 
(135b) 
 
 Complicates the separation of 
designators into discrete units 
Mismatched 
silkscreen vs. 
component 
(2f, 9b, 9f) 
 “Defect” isn’t enough of a label – 
is the defect on the silkscreen, or 
the SMD? 
 Duplicated designators can either 
be a designer’s mistake or a more 
serious underlying issue 
Non-text silkscreen 
(101f, 42f, 2f) 
 Alignment markers are difficult to 
automatically codify 
 Few unskilled annotators consider 
these markings to be annotations 
 Each alignment marker has highly 
variable representations 
Designators for 
unmounted 
components 
(2f, 1f) 
 No existing standard for correct 
annotation – should each pad be 
associated with the designator? 
Should the association be blank 
since no component is present? 
 
Table 5. Overview of the methodological challenges encountered during data annotation. Regardless of image quality or inspection
method, these issues will be present when creating a store of ground truth information.
Reference designator agglomeration. When several designators are clustered as previously described and all refer to a
sequential group of similar component types (i.e. a row of resistors/capacitors), one approach is to create a single label
for all components. Various manifestations of this principle are illustrated in row 2. Since there are no design standards
for how this grouping must take place, where silkscreen must be located relative to components, or how the association
is made between a component and its text, understanding and annotating this association is difficult. Additionally, these
cases demonstrate how silkscreen-to-component associations are not a one-to-one mapping: a single silkscreen can
refer to multiple components and multiple silkscreens can belong to the same component (this is fairly common in IC
or header pin annotations).
Run-on designator clusters. The same space restrictions explained in the first paragraph can cause groups of designators
to run into each other and appear as one long text string. Humans can usually intuit the designer’s intent, but these
run-on designators can complicate automatic component designator extraction using off-the-shelf OCR methods. In the
example shown in row 3, not only are designators prefixed with an integer character (“C4V"), but are close enough to
nearby designators that whitespace cannot be used as token separator.
13

===== Page 14 =====

JETC ’23, XXX XXX 2023, XX, XX
Jessurun et al.
Mismatched silkscreen vs. component. From an assurance perspective, this is one of the most challenging scenarios to
address. In prior works, independent silkscreen and component annotations could both be considered valid as shown in
the first two figures of row 4. However, the component in question clearly does not match its reference designator. “L"
is most commonly reserved for inductors, while “R" is almost exclusively used for resistors. From their appearance, the
associated SMDs are clearly a resistor and capacitor, respectively. As such, while the components are properly mounted
and the text is legible, there is an error in their association. Similarly, the third figure in this row illustrates a duplicate
silkscreen marking. Both are correct for their associated component and legible, but the duplicate reference is highly
abnormal and likely indicates a silkscreen mistake. In cases like these, determining whether the error is with the design,
silkscreen print, or mounted component creates challenges for assurance.
Non-text silkscreen. Beyond alphanumeric characters, a host of various additional information is printed on the PCB
substrate. As described in Section 4.1, silkscreen can also refer to mounting information. However, a common theme
is that silkscreen is primarily intended for human evaluation and has no uniform representation. Hence, without a
catalog of common templates, it can be complex to algorithmically derive alignment information as presented in row
5 of Table 5. In the first instance, the polarity of a capacitor is presented with double arrows that should match the
on-device markings present. Secondly, the obscured Zener diode symbol indicates polarity with a vertical line that
should match the black bar present on the mounted component. Finally, the most complex case involves overlapping
silkscreens where a left-facing triangle indicates the position of an IC’s first pin. In each case, a vastly different visual
cue is used to indicate alignment. These complexities drastically complicate how features such as polarity should be
represented in an annotation database.
Designators for unmounted components. The final highlighted case for methodological insights involves designator
associations with unpopulated solder pads. Technically, the designator does not refer to the pads, but the missing
component meant to reside between them. At the same time, the pads are a reasonable approximation of the same spatial
location associated with the text. Hence, there is justifiable reasoning for both including and excluding a correlation
indicator for the silkscreen in question. Moreover, if a component association is created, it is unclear whether it belongs
to one or multiple pads. Each of these considerations complicates the process of generating ground truth labels in this
circumstance. during FPIC annotation, the pad closest to the designator is given the association.
5
NEWLY ENABLED RESEARCH
FPIC is larger and contains more diverse PCB examples than prior PCB image datasets, making it a better input to
ML training and a better benchmark for validating optical assurance techniques. Additionally, its annotations include
novel information that enables new optical assurance research. The following paragraphs elucidate the connections
between specific PCB assurance challenges and data that is collected for the first time in FPIC.
5.1
Dataset size and diversity
The left-hand side of Figure 2 emphasizes that optical assurance must be calibrated for the PCB under inspection
and the threat to be detected. PCBs exhibit tremendous diversity across many characteristics that could impact optical
assurance performance. For example, densely-packed boards, smaller components, or more sophisticated counterfeiting
might all require higher imaging resolution to enable successful assurance. If a dataset is systematically biased with
regard to imaging-relevant characteristics (e.g., a dataset containing boards of a similar manufacturing year, similar
application domain, similar types of components, etc.), this may bias ML networks trained on the data and limit the
14

===== Page 15 =====

FPIC: A Novel Semantic Dataset for Optical PCB Assurance
JETC ’23, XXX XXX 2023, XX, XX
generality of performance claims that can be made for techniques that are validated against the dataset. Increasing the
number and variety of represented PCBs and annotated components is the best hedge against these pitfalls.
As summarized in Table 1, FPIC is significantly larger and more generalized than in prior work. It possesses more
labeled PCB samples and drastically more unique component annotations than the leading prior work. Among several
other significant benefits, we highlight that a larger dataset allows tighter confidence margins on statistical analysis,
enables FPIC to display more optical inspection corner cases, and provides more data for training large AI networks.
Notably, FPIC will continue to grow over time as more PCBs and annotations are added. As the technology landscape
evolves, it is necessary to re-evaluate whether the dataset remains representative of boards to-be-assured.
While dataset size is important, it cannot stand alone as a metric of dataset quality; diversity of examples in the
dataset is equally important. FPIC was purposefully built to include PCBs from many application domains, built by
different original equipment manufacturers (OEMs), manufactured in a range of years, and obtained from a variety
of distributors in a variety of conditions. This intentional variation ensures that FPIC is representative of the broader
population of printed circuit boards. This will help AI models trained on FPIC to perform well on systems they have
never seen and reduces bias when FPIC is used to validate optical assurance techniques. Manufacturing date, PCB
function, manufacturer, distributor, etc. are qualitative and imprecise proxies for dataset diversity. Currently, there are
no precise, measurable characteristics for describing a population of PCBs from an imaging perspective, but additional
research will be able to standardize such metrics. Here, too, FPIC can provide insight. Its size and diversity enable
studies to determine the most imaging-relevant PCB characteristics.
5.2
Improved SMD contour analysis from semantic segmentation
Overwhelming amounts of literature demonstrate the usefulness of semantically segmented ground truth for enhanced
machine learning capabilities [50, 51, 52, 53, 54]. While segmentation is possible with automated methods, the outputs
are not consistently defect-free without significant hyperparameter tuning. In other words, high-quality automated
segmentation still requires a large amount of human oversight in the segmentation architecture and parametrization.
However, neural networks trained on human-verified segmentation masks overcome these difficulties with enough
diverse ground truth data. The paragraphs below detail several ways machine learning tasks trained using segmentation
ground truth rather than bounding boxes yield significantly improved outputs.
Component localization. While bounding box data can reasonably train a network to find components on a PCB,
semantically trained networks can take this one step further. Figure 5 shows that predictions overlap for nearby
components in a bounding-box-trained LinkNet architecture versus its semantic counterpart. All aspects of training
were the same in both cases except the masks.
BoM property extraction. Multiple component footprint properties such as pin count, pitch, width, and spacing can
only be determined with accurate outlines. FPIC provides enough of these samples to allow property extraction on
unseen data as well by training semantic segmentation networks on the ground truth information. This drastically
improves the ability of assurance algorithms to cross-reference known component properties against IPC standards and
datasheet specifications. Figure 5 also shows how a semantically trained ML model accurately represents IC contours
with sufficient training data. Figure 6 illustrates how these contours can be directly translated into BoM properties.
Assembly analysis. Beyond the component itself, how a device is mounted on the PCB can also be analyzed more fully
with semantic contours. The difference between an oblong and right-angled device can yield insights as to whether the
mount is within tolerance or is defective. Similarly, heavily skewed pins from tall through-hold components can be
readily identified with precise boundaries and would otherwise not stand out with traditional bounding box annotations.
15

===== Page 16 =====

JETC ’23, XXX XXX 2023, XX, XX
Jessurun et al.
Fig. 5. Comparison of predictions of a bounding-box trained LinkNet architecture vs. semantic masks. In the former case, regions
next to each other were considered the same component while they were correctly distinguished in the latter.
Fig. 6. Accurate semantic boundaries drastically ease the process of extracting relevant BoM characteristics of various components.
5.3
Schematic analysis from component locator association
Often, silkscreen designator information is critical to identifying the function or type of component present in an
optical image. As such, identifying which components are associated with what board text can result in a significant
boost in identification capabilities.
DRC Analysis. Text such as “PWR" or “GND" can be associated with the substrate itself rather than / along with a
component. In these cases, aspects of the board layout can be analyzed in light of this silkscreen information to ensure
both are in agreement. Figure 7 demonstrates how the larger width requirement for power traces can be evaluated in
light of the associated silkscreen identifier.
Designator Verification. Datasheets and BoMs often make heavy use of pin numbers and reference designators (i.e.
“R101", “L2", etc.). Since the association between components and their text can be highly nontrivial (see Section 4.2),
ground truth markers for this information are highly valuable for automated inspection efforts. When the designator is
correct, and the SMD looks good, only the component locator can indicate whether there is a mismatch.
Assembly verification. As noted in Table 5, several types of silkscreen identifiers assist in determining device orientation
or polarization. Hence, additional research objectives can bring an orthogonal dimension of assurance inspection to the
traditional optical image analysis workflow.
16

===== Page 17 =====

FPIC: A Novel Semantic Dataset for Optical PCB Assurance
JETC ’23, XXX XXX 2023, XX, XX
Fig. 7. Traces for power lines require larger widths in general compared to normal signal traces to handle increased current flow. It
can be helpful to verify this information against OCR information.
Chatterjee et al. describe an augmented reality system that quickly correlates design schematics with hardware to
simplify the process of quality assurance and HW/SW context switching [55]. Data from FPIC would allow such a
system to rely less on software schematics for similar offerings when few design files are present.
5.4
Data balance through parametrized acquisition
Beyond the annotated metadata, much information about the PCB samples themselves is also collected. By combining
information about real-world image scale, PCB manufacturer, and board description, SMD information can be correlated
against additional factors other than their optical appearance. For instance, novel research directions might include
evaluating whether certain manufacturers prefer specific brands or ratings of passive components. Or, whether defects
and annotation errors occur more frequently for some sample categories. Significantly, the descriptive information
associated with each board can be tied to relevant datasheets and CAD information for multiple samples, allowing
schematic-level verification of collected information.
6
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In conclusion, we have reviewed state-of-the-art techniques for AOI and observed the strong, rapid trend toward ML
solutions. These require significant amounts of labeled ground truth data, which is lacking in the publicly available PCB
data space. The FPIC dataset (https://www.trust-hub.org/#/data/pcb-images) is proposed to address this bottleneck in
available large-volume, diverse annotations. Additionally, this work covers the potential increase in hardware security
capabilities and observed methodological distinctions highlighted during data collection.
Via, Trace, Pin Annotation. Future releases of the FPIC dataset will include annotations of vias, traces, and pins across
a board’s surface. This will yield significant insights into cross-component connectivity, the relationship between
components and substrates, signal frequency analysis through trace layout inspection, and much more.
Synthesized PCB samples. Beyond annotating purchased physical samples, future iterations can include fully synthesized CAD renderings and compare digital versus real-world annotation results. In this manner, the FPIC dataset could
be drastically increased by providing augmented virtual counterparts. Moreover, a subset of these samples could be
fabricated to determine more accurate relationships between design schematics and the acquired optical data. In this
17

===== Page 18 =====

JETC ’23, XXX XXX 2023, XX, XX
Jessurun et al.
vein, Calzada et al. demonstrated several challenges inherent in optical PCB inspection by designing custom samples
with various intentional defects and Trojans, ranging from easy to difficult detection criteria [56].
Track related CAD schematics and datasheets. Along with physical samples, the item description is associated with
datasheets or development files in several cases. Collecting this information in addition to each board will greatly
increase the ability to provide hardware (HW) assurance through cross-referencing against known circuit properties.
Additionally, these files would increase the accuracy of ground truth annotations since they provide references for the
type and characteristics of each mounted component.
Multimodal data fusion. The FPIC dataset is a valuable resource for AOI research, but does little to address volumetric
issues, material properties, etc. Toward this end, increased data acquisition and rigorous labeling in other modalities
such as X-ray, Terahertz (THz), and similarly neglected modalities would greatly assist additional assurance objectives.
Active efforts in this direction are underway by the FICS group [57], but as explained below it will be essential for
additional collaborators to join this process.
Continuous collection and collaboration. A major theme throughout this work is the importance of publicly available
data from a diverse array of sources and annotators. Continuous collaboration with the hardware assurance and
computer vision communities at large is essential for growth in AOI capabilities. More than just data alone, these
enhancements would include code libraries, frameworks, standards, and evaluation mechanisms/metrics for improving
the baseline for quality ground truth annotations. The FPIC dataset will continue to grow in the near future, and this
increased coordination and collaboration will ensure the quality and fidelity of the dataset only improves in that course.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. Robertson and M. Riley. The big hack: how China used a tiny chip to infiltrate U.S. companies, 2018.
[2]
J. Appelbaum, J. HORCHERT, O. REISSMANN, M. ROSENBACH, J. SCHINDLER, and C. STÖCKER. NSA’s Secret
Toolbox: Unit Offers Spy Gadgets for Every Need. Der Spiegel, Dec. 2013.
[3]
J. Harrison, N. Asadizanjani, and M. Tehranipoor. On malicious implants in PCBs throughout the supply chain.
Integration, 79:12–22, 2021.
[4]
Investigation into counterfeit electronic parts in the department of defense supply chain, Nov. 2012.
[5]
M. Moganti, F. Ercal, C. H. Dagli, and S. Tsunekawa. Automatic PCB Inspection Algorithms: A Survey. Computer
Vision and Image Understanding, 63(2):287–313, Mar. 1, 1996.
[6]
J. Richter, D. Streitferdt, and E. Rozova. On the development of intelligent optical inspections. In 2017 IEEE 7th
Annual Computing and Communication Workshop and Conference (CCWC). 2017 IEEE 7th Annual Computing
and Communication Workshop and Conference (CCWC), pages 1–6, Jan. 2017.
[7]
U. Guin, K. Huang, D. DiMase, J. M. Carulli, M. Tehranipoor, and Y. Makris. Counterfeit integrated circuits: a
rising threat in the global semiconductor supply chain. Proc. IEEE, 102(8):1207–1228, Aug. 2014.
[8]
B. Grow, C.-C. Tschang, C. Edwards, B. Burnsed, and K. Epstein. Dangerous fakes. Bloomberg Businessweek,
(4103), Oct. 2008.
[9]
M. McGuire, U. Ogras, and S. Ozev. PCB Hardware Trojans: Attack Modes and Detection Strategies. In 2019 IEEE
37th VLSI Test Symposium (VTS), pages 1–6, 2019.
[10]
A. Huang. Keeping secrets in hardware: the Microsoft XBox case study, May 2002. AI Memo 2002-08.
[11]
S. E. Quadir, J. Chen, D. Forte, N. Asadizanjani, S. Shahbazmohamadi, L. Wang, J. Chandy, and M. Tehranipoor. A
survey on chip to system reverse engineering. J. Emerg. Technol. Comput. Syst., 13(1), Apr. 2016.
18

===== Page 19 =====

FPIC: A Novel Semantic Dataset for Optical PCB Assurance
JETC ’23, XXX XXX 2023, XX, XX
[12]
L. Watkins. Inspection of integrated circuit photomasks with intensity spatial filters. Proceedings of the IEEE,
57(9):1634–1639, Sept. 1969.
[13]
W.-C. Wang, S.-L. Chen, L. Chen, and W.-J. Chang. A Machine Vision Based Automatic Optical Inspection System
for Measuring Drilling Quality of Printed Circuit Boards. IEEE Access, 2017.
[14]
A. F. M. Hani, A. Malik, R. Kamil, and C. Thong. A review of SMD-PCB defects and detection algorithms. In
Other Conferences, 2012.
[15]
P. Wei, C. Liu, M. Liu, Y. Gao, and H. Liu. CNN-based reference comparison method for classifying bare PCB
defects, 2018.
[16]
L. Zhang, Y. Jin, X. Yang, X. Li, X. Duan, Y. Sun, and H. Liu. Convolutional neural network-based multi-label
classification of PCB defects, 2018.
[17]
H. Lu, D. Mehta, O. Paradis, N. Asadizanjani, M. Tehranipoor, and D. L. Woodard. FICS-PCB: A Multi-Modal
Image Dataset for Automated Printed Circuit Board Visual Inspection. 366, 2020.
[18]
S. Youn, Y. Lee, and T. Park. Automatic classification of SMD packages using neural network. In 2014 IEEE/SICE
International Symposium on System Integration. 2014 IEEE/SICE International Symposium on System Integration,
pages 790–795, Dec. 2014.
[19]
V. A. Adibhatla, J. Shieh, M. Abbod, H.-C. Chih, C. Hsu, and J. Cheng. Detecting Defects in PCB using Deep
Learning via Convolution Neural Networks. 2018 13th International Microsystems, Packaging, Assembly and
Circuits Technology Conference (IMPACT), 2018.
[20]
D.-u. Lim, Y.-G. Kim, and T.-H. Park. SMD Classification for Automated Optical Inspection Machine Using
Convolution Neural Network. In 2019 Third IEEE International Conference on Robotic Computing (IRC). 2019 Third
IEEE International Conference on Robotic Computing (IRC), pages 395–398, Feb. 2019.
[21]
Y.-G. Kim, D.-U. Lim, J.-H. Ryu, and T.-H. Park. SMD Defect Classification by Convolution Neural Network and
PCB Image Transform. In 2018 IEEE 3rd International Conference on Computing, Communication and Security
(ICCCS). 2018 IEEE 3rd International Conference on Computing, Communication and Security (ICCCS), pages 180–
183, Oct. 2018.
[22]
W. Huang and P. Wei. A PCB dataset for defects detection and classification. 2019. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/
1901.08204.
[23]
U. Guin, D. DiMase, and M. Tehranipoor. A comprehensive framework for counterfeit defect coverage analysis
and detection assessment. Journal of Electronic Testing, 30(1):25–40, Feb. 2014.
[24]
M. Goetz and R. Varma. Counterfeit Electronic Components Identification: A Case Study. In 2017.
[25]
H. Wu, G. Feng, H. Li, and X. Zeng. Automated visual inspection of surface mounted chip components. In
2010 IEEE International Conference on Mechatronics and Automation. 2010 IEEE International Conference on
Mechatronics and Automation, pages 1789–1794, Aug. 2010.
[26]
M. Tehranipoor, U. Guin, and S. Bhunia. Invasion of the hardware snatchers: cloned electronics pollute the
market. IEEE Spectrum, Apr. 2017.
[27]
Pangolin Laser Systems. Recognize counterfeit FB3-QS.
[28]
L. H. Newman. The Anatomy of a Cisco Counterfeit Shows Its Dangerous Potential, July 2020.
[29]
M. Azhagan, D. Mehta, H. Lu, S. Agrawal, P. Chawla, M. Tehranipoor, D. L. Woodard, and N. Asadizanjani. A
new framework for automatic bill of material generation and visual inspection. In 2019.
19

===== Page 20 =====

JETC ’23, XXX XXX 2023, XX, XX
Jessurun et al.
[30]
N. Asadizanjani, M. Tehranipoor, and D. Forte. Pcb reverse engineering using nondestructive x-ray tomography
and advanced image processing. IEEE Transactions on Components, Packaging and Manufacturing Technology,
7(2):292–299, 2017.
[31]
Y. Fridman, M. Rusanovsky, and G. Oren. Changechip: a reference-based unsupervised change detection for pcb
defect detection. arXiv:2109.05746 [cs], Sept. 2021. arXiv: 2109.05746.
[32]
P. Ganapathy and A. Gupta. Defect detection and classification in manufacturing using Amazon Lookout for
Vision and Amazon Rekognition Custom Labels. Amazon Web Services. July 13, 2021. url: https://aws.amazon.
com/blogs/machine-learning/defect-detection-and-classification-in-manufacturing-using-amazon-lookoutfor-vision-and-amazon-rekognition-custom-labels/ (visited on 12/02/2021).
[33]
T. J. Mazon De Oliveira, M. A. Wehrmeister, and B. T. Nassu. Detecting Modifications in Printed Circuit Boards
from Fuel Pump Controllers. In 2017 30th SIBGRAPI Conference on Graphics, Patterns and Images (SIBGRAPI). 2017
30th SIBGRAPI Conference on Graphics, Patterns and Images (SIBGRAPI), pages 87–94, Oct. 2017.
[34]
H. Zhao, J. Cheng, and J. Jin. NI vision based automatic optical inspection (AOI) for surface mount devices:
Devices and method. In 2009 International Conference on Applied Superconductivity and Electromagnetic Devices.
2009 International Conference on Applied Superconductivity and Electromagnetic Devices, pages 356–360, Sept.
2009.
[35]
C.-C. Wang, B. C. Jiang, J.-Y. Lin, and C.-C. Chu. Machine Vision-Based Defect Detection in IC Images Using the
Partial Information Correlation Coefficient. IEEE Transactions on Semiconductor Manufacturing, 26(3):378–384,
Aug. 2013.
[36]
C. H. Lin, S. H. Wang, and C. J. Lin. Using Convolutional Neural Networks for Character Verification on Integrated
Circuit Components of Printed Circuit Boards. Springer, 2019.
[37]
C. Pramerdorfer and M. Kampel. A dataset for computer-vision-based PCB analysis. 2015 14th IAPR International
Conference on Machine Vision Applications (MVA), 2015.
[38]
H. Larochelle, Y. Bengio, J. Louradour, and P. Lamblin. Exploring Strategies for Training Deep Neural Networks.
Journal of machine learning research, 10(1):40, 2009.
[39]
M. A. Reza and D. J. Crandall. IC-ChipNet: deep Embedding Learning for Fine-grained Retrieval, Recognition,
and Verification of Microelectronic Images. 2020 IEEE Applied Imagery Pattern Recognition Workshop (AIPR), 2020.
[40]
N. Karanth. Pcbexperiment, Aug. 2020.
[41]
C.-W. Kuo, J. Ashmore, D. Huggins, and Z. Kira. Data-efficient graph embedding learning for pcb component
detection. In 2019 IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV). IEEE, 2019.
[42]
S. Gang, N. Fabrice, and J. Lee. Coresets for PCB Character Recognition based on Deep Learning. In 2020
International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Information and Communication (ICAIIC). 2020 International
Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Information and Communication (ICAIIC), pages 637–642, Feb. 2020.
[43]
S. Gang, N. Fabrice, D. Chung, and J. Lee. Character Recognition of Components Mounted on Printed Circuit
Board Using Deep Learning. Sensors, 2021.
[44]
S. Tang, F. He, X. Huang, and J. Yang. Online PCB Defect Detector On A New PCB Defect Dataset. Feb. 16, 2019.
url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1902.06197 (visited on 11/18/2021).
[45]
Z. Chen, T. Wanyan, R. Rao, B. Cutilli, J. Sowinski, D. Crandall, and R. Templeman. Addressing supply chain risks
of microelectronic devices through computer vision. In 2017 IEEE Applied Imagery Pattern Recognition Workshop
(AIPR). 2017 IEEE Applied Imagery Pattern Recognition Workshop (AIPR), pages 1–8, Washington, DC, USA.
IEEE, Oct. 2017.
20

===== Page 21 =====

FPIC: A Novel Semantic Dataset for Optical PCB Assurance
JETC ’23, XXX XXX 2023, XX, XX
[46]
M. Li, N. Yao, S. Liu, S. Li, Y. Zhao, and S. G. Kong. Multisensor Image Fusion for Automated Detection of Defects
in Printed Circuit Boards. IEEE Sensors Journal, 21(20):23390–23399, Oct. 2021.
[47]
J.-S. Shieh. Applying deep learning to defect detection in printed circuit boards via a newest model of you-onlylook-once. Mathematical Biosciences and Engineering, 18(4):4411–4428, May 21, 2021.
[48]
G. Mahalingam, K. Gay, and K. Ricanek. PCB-METAL: a PCB Image Dataset for Advanced Computer Vision
Machine Learning Component Analysis. 2019 16th International Conference on Machine Vision Applications (MVA),
2019.
[49]
O. P. Paradis, N. T. Jessurun, M. Tehranipoor, and N. Asadizanjani. Color Normalization for Robust Automatic
Bill of Materials Generation and Visual Inspection of PCBs. In ISTFA 2020, pages 172–179. ASM International,
Dec. 1, 2020.
[50]
A. Garcia-Garcia, S. Orts-Escolano, S. Oprea, V. Villena-Martinez, and J. Garcia-Rodriguez. A Review on Deep
Learning Techniques Applied to Semantic Segmentation. Apr. 22, 2017. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1704.06857
(visited on 01/08/2022).
[51]
P. Wang, P. Chen, Y. Yuan, D. Liu, Z. Huang, X. Hou, and G. Cottrell. Understanding Convolution for Semantic
Segmentation. In 2018 IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV). 2018 IEEE Winter
Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), pages 1451–1460, Mar. 2018.
[52]
H. Zhang, K. Dana, J. Shi, Z. Zhang, X. Wang, A. Tyagi, and A. Agrawal. Context Encoding for Semantic Segmentation. In 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 7151–7160, Salt Lake City, UT, USA. IEEE, June 2018.
[53]
J. Long, E. Shelhamer, and T. Darrell. Fully Convolutional Networks for Semantic Segmentation. In Proceedings
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 3431–3440, 2015.
[54]
C. Yu, J. Wang, C. Peng, C. Gao, G. Yu, and N. Sang. BiSeNet: Bilateral Segmentation Network for Real-time
Semantic Segmentation. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pages 325–341,
2018.
[55]
I. Chatterjee, O. Khvan, T. Pforte, R. Li, and S. N. Patel. Augmented Silkscreen: Designing AR Interactions for
Debugging Printed Circuit Boards. Conference on Designing Interactive Systems, 2021.
[56]
P. Calzada, J. Harrison, N. Asadizanjani, M. Tehranipoor, and P. Chawla. PCB trojan detection using optical
imaging. In 46th GOMAC Tech, Miami, FL, Mar. 2022.
[57]
D. Mehta, J. True, O. P. Dizon-Paradis, N. Jessurun, D. L. Woodard, N. Asadizanjani, and M. Tehranipoor. FICS
PCB X-ray: A dataset for automated printed circuit board inter-layers inspection, 2022.
ACRONYMS
AI artificial intelligence
AOI automated optical inspection
BoM bill of materials
CAD computer-aided design
CV computer vision
DRC design rule check
FICS Florida Institute for Cybersecurity Research
FPIC FICS PCB Image Collection
HW hardware
21

===== Page 22 =====

JETC ’23, XXX XXX 2023, XX, XX
Jessurun et al.
IC integrated circuit
IP intellectual property
IPC Institute for Interconnecting and Packaging Electronic Circuits
IR infrared
ML machine learning
OCR optical character recognition
OEM original equipment manufacturer
PCB printed circuit board
PCBA PCB assembly
SMD surface-mount device
SME subject matter expert
SVM support vector machine
THz Terahertz
22
