

===== Page 1 =====

arXiv:2506.17474v1  [physics.app-ph]  20 Jun 2025
Improving the lifetime of aluminum-based superconducting qubits through atomic
layer etching and deposition
Neha Mahuli
,∗Joaquin Minguzzi, Jiansong Gao, Rachel Resnick,† Sandra Diez,‡ Cosmic Raj, Guillaume
Marcaud
, Matthew Hunt, Loren Swenson, Jefferson Rose, Oskar Painter
, and Ignace Jarrige
§
AWS Center for Quantum Computing, Pasadena, CA 91106, USA
(Dated: June 24, 2025)
We present a dry surface treatment combining atomic layer etching and deposition (ALE and
ALD) to mitigate dielectric loss in fully fabricated superconducting quantum devices formed from
aluminum thin films on silicon. The treatment, performed as a final processing step prior to device
packaging, starts by conformally removing the native metal oxide and fabrication residues from the
exposed surfaces through ALE before in situ encapsulating the metal surfaces with a thin dielectric
layer using ALD. We measure a two-fold reduction in loss attributed to two-level system (TLS)
absorption in treated aluminum-based resonators and planar transmon qubits. Treated transmons
with compact capacitor plates and gaps achieve median Q and T1 values of 3.69 ± 0.42 × 106 and
196 ± 22 µs, respectively. These improvements were found to be sustained over several months.
We discuss how the combination of ALE and ALD reverses fabrication-induced surface damages to
significantly and durably improve device performance via a reduction of the TLS defect density in
the capacitive elements.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Superconducting transmons are a leading platform for
building a scalable, fault-tolerant quantum computer capable of solving problems currently intractable with classical computing architecture1.
In the early stages of
development, transmon performance improved primarily
through design optimizations, such as reducing dielectric
participation in critical surfaces2–4 and enhancing readout via Purcell filtering5,6. More recently, the focus has
shifted toward enhancing the quality of materials, a strategy that has already shown great promise in mitigating
two-level system (TLS) losses and improving transmon
energy-relaxation times7–9.
Among the main dielectric regions in superconducting
circuits, the metal-air (MA) and substrate-air (SA) interfaces are particularly susceptible to degradation during the fabrication process.
These interfaces are often
characterized by polymeric residues, interstitial contaminants, morphological damage, and thickened oxide layers, resulting in a larger loss tangent compared to other
interfaces10.
This stresses the need to develop postfabrication surface treatment methods that alleviate or
eliminate these effects without introducing new damage.
Recent efforts to reduce dielectric loss at the MA interface have centered on three primary approaches: (i)
exploring new ground-layer materials that form low-loss
native oxides8, (ii) chemically etching defect-rich surface
layers11–14, and (iii) capping the top surface of the ground
layer with a lower-loss superconductor, or a noble metal
to prevent oxidation15–18. In (iii), surface capping was
performed on the blanket ground layer prior to fabrication, as subsequent etching exposed the sidewalls of
the superconductor. As a result, amorphous oxides and
process-induced defects on the sidewalls likely dominated
the dielectric loss in these capped devices18. Here, we
present an alternative surface engineering approach that
overcomes this limitation by treating all exposed surfaces
of fully fabricated devices using a combination of atomic
layer etching and deposition (ALE and ALD) as a final
surface modification step prior to device packaging.
Both ALE and ALD rely on a self-limiting, sequential gas-phase surface reaction mechanism to respectively
remove and form material layers with monolayer precision and a high conformality compatible with threedimensional structures.
By applying these techniques
to aluminum (Al)-based coplanar waveguide (CPW) resonators and planar transmons, we show that fabricationrelated contamination of the Al and silicon (Si) substrate
surfaces is substantially reduced and the lossy native Al
oxide layer is selectively replaced with a thin and stoichiometric Al2O3 capping layer.
These modifications
to the MA and SA interfaces correlate with a 50% reduction in dielectric loss in the resonators and a twofold increase in both the transmon median quality factor
(Q) and energy relaxation times (T1), reaching median
Q and T1 values of 3.69 ± 0.42 × 106 and 196 ± 22 µs, respectively. These improvements are achieved for several
fabricated chips, and across a frequency range spanning
2.2-4.4 GHz. This study shows that the in situ combination of ALE and ALD serves as an effective and scalable
surface engineering strategy for Al-on-Si superconducting quantum circuits, with potential applications across
a myriad of architectures and materials.
II.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A.
Surface Engineering Effects on Resonator Loss
Tangent
Superconducting microwave resonators provide an effective platform for evaluating materials-induced dielectric loss, minimizing the design, fabrication, and measurement overhead compared to transmons19,20.
λ/4CPW resonators were fabricated using 100-nm thick Al

===== Page 2 =====

B
Surface Engineering Effects on Transmon Performance
2
FIG. 1.
δTLS as a function of power for three representative resonators, comparing untreated and ALE+ALD treated
chips. Inset: Micrograph of a CPW resonator chip.
films on high-resistivity (> 20 kΩ· cm) silicon substrates,
with trace and gap widths of 30 µm each.
Each chip
contains 12 resonators with frequencies ranging from
5.2 to 6.2 GHz, inductively coupled to the transmission line, as shown in the inset of Figure 1.
We performed S21 transmission measurements in a dilution refrigerator at a base temperature of 10 mK and the intrinsic quality factors (Qi) were extracted using a circlefitting method21,22.
Measurements were conducted on
untreated devices to establish a baseline, and directly
compared with ALE+ALD treated devices.
Our devices exhibit the typical saturation behavior
of Qi as a function of photon number.
In the singlephoton limit, losses are dominated by unsaturated or
partially saturated TLSs, while at higher power levels, Qi
is predominantly limited by other loss mechanisms such
as vortices, non-equilibrium quasi-particles, or packaging
modes. We quantify the TLS contribution to loss, δTLS,
from high-power (HP) and low-power (LP) Qi per the
following equation23:
δTLS =
1
QTLS
=
1
QLP
i
−
1
QHP
i
(1)
Figure 1 shows a power sweep of δTLS for three untreated/treated pairs of representative resonators at 5.3,
5.4 and 5.45 GHz frequencies. At single-photon powers,
the loss of the ALE+ALD treated resonators is approximately half that of the untreated resonators. This shows
that materials-based losses can be efficiently reduced in
single-layer Al devices using the ALE+ALD treatment.
B.
Surface Engineering Effects on Transmon
Performance
Motivated by the promising resonator results, we extend our study to transmons made from Al on Si.
Here, we compare the transmon qubit energy relaxation time (T1), and corresponding effective quality factor (Q), before and after the treatment.
The measurements were conducted on Josephson junction (JJ)
based planar transmons coupled to CPW readout resonators. Five chips, each containing four tunable transmons with variable-size junctions and constant-geometry
shunt capacitors (24-µm in-plane dimension, 30-µm gapto-ground plane), were measured in the frequency range
of 2.2–4.4 GHz before and after the treatment. Further
qubit design details and a micrograph of a representative transmon device are provided in Figure SI-1 of the
Supplementary Information (SI). To improve the pretreatment statistical analysis, six additional untreated
chips were measured. One chip was also measured before
and after annealing at 300◦C under vacuum in the ALD
chamber to disentangle the impact of heating from the
ALE+ALD treatment, which also takes place at 300◦C.
Transmon and readout resonator frequencies were measured, and qubit T1-time data collected over several hours
across a broad frequency range. This approach enabled
us to sample a wider distribution of possible TLS defects,
facilitating faster and more accurate characterization of
the T1 distribution24,25. Based on the standard tunneling model (STM)26, it can be approximated that the
TLS density remains constant across the measured frequency range, suggesting a frequency-independent metric
of transmon“quality” based on the effective quality factor
Q = 2πf01T1 4, where f01 is the ground-to-first excited
state transition frequency of the transmon.
T1 and Q measurements of treated and untreated
transmons are presented in Figure 2(a) and (b), respectively. Across the measured frequency range, median Q
values remain mainly under 3 × 106 for the untreated
control and annealed-only devices and increase to 37 × 106 after the treatment, with some values exceeding
the 9 × 106 mark. Similarly, most median T1 times for
the untreated and annealed-only devices are below 150
µs, whereas treated devices achieve median T1 values in
the 150–400 µs range. These results highlight the effectiveness of the ALE+ALD treatment in reducing the TLS
losses in planar transmon devices, consistent with earlier
observations from single layer resonators.
This improvement can be further quantified by comparing the pre- and post-treatment empirical probability density function (e-PDF) and cumulative distribution
function (e-CDF) of a frequency-independent parameter,
Q, shown in Figure 2(c). Prior to the treatment, the ePDF exhibits a median Q of 1.91 ± 0.18 × 106, while the
e-CDF shows a 90th-percentile of 2.67×106, which corresponds to a median T1 of 101±10 µs and a 90th-percentile
T1 of 142 µs for f01 of 3 GHz. Following the treatment,
the median Q in the e-PDF increases to 3.69±0.42×106,
while the 90th-percentile Q in the e-CDF rises to 5.9×106,
corresponding to a median T1 of 196 ± 22 µs and 90thpercentile T1 of 313 µs for f01 of 3 GHz.
While this
enhancement reflects a reduction in TLS density after
treatment, the T1 floor remains largely unchanged, likely

===== Page 3 =====

B
Surface Engineering Effects on Transmon Performance
3
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIG. 2.
Frequency dependence of (a) measured T1 times and (b) estimated Q for various devices: untreated, ALE+ALD
treated, and annealed-only. The dashed lines are a guide to the eye. (c) The empirical probability distribution function (ePDF) and cumulative distribution function (e-CDF) are also shown for Q before and after the treatment; the dotted horizontal
line, vertical lines and shaded areas represent the 90th-percentile, median, and median absolute deviation (MAD), respectively.
due to the finite residual population of more strongly
coupled TLSs still present on the capacitor pads. As a
result, the spread in T1 and Q values increases, leading
to a higher standard deviation after treatment.
The highest performing treated devices are consistently observed within the 2.6–3.7 GHz range, with some
of the Q values surpassing 6 × 106. Purcell loss due to
radiation into the qubit read-out resonator, illustrated
in Figure SI-2, is presumed to contribute to the reduction in T1 and Q at higher frequencies. Regardless of the
Purcell effect, the consistent enhancement in T1 and Q
post-ALE+ALD treatment across the studied frequency
range, which is not achieved by annealing alone, provides compelling evidence that the surface dielectric loss
of the transmons is reduced by the ALE+ALD treatment specifically. No decline in T1 and Q was observed in
transmons measured over periods of up to 8-9 months after the treatment, highlighting the long-term stability of
this treatment for Al-on-Si based superconducting quantum circuits.
Additionally, a consistent increase in transmon frequency (f01) by several hundreds of MHz was also observed for all treated transmons (as shown in Figure SI3). This increase originates from junction evolution, as
we observe a rise in junction energy (Ej) after the treatment, while capacitive energy (Ec) remains unaffected.
This frequency shift results from the elevated processing temperatures during treatment, which was also confirmed with annealed-only devices; however, its absolute
magnitude is likely influenced by additional factors, such
as the initial interface quality before the JJ deposition
and fabrication variability. Additionally, we observe that
transmon Q decreases with increasing frequency shift (as
shown in Figure SI-4), likely due to enhanced Purcell loss
as f01 approaches the readout frequency.
C.
Surface Chemistry
The ALE chemistry, utilizing alternating exposures
of trimethylaluminum (TMA) and hydrogen fluoridepyridine (HF-pyridine) at 300◦C27, was developed to etch
the native aluminum oxide. The subsequent ALD process, using TMA and water (H2O)28, was tuned to regrow a 1-nm thick Al2O3 layer. Detailed process parameters and methodology are provided in the Methods section. Here, we characterize the effect of these processes
on the chemical properties of the surface of our devices,
using a combination of X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
(XPS), photo-induced force infrared microscopy (PiFM),
and transmission electron microscopy complemented by
electron energy loss spectroscopy (TEM-EELS). Using
lab-scale XPS with an Al Kα X-ray source (1486.6 eV),
we measured the Al 2p, C 1s, and O 1s core levels on
the surface of transmon qubit chips. A detailed description of the fitting procedure is provided in SI (Figures
SI-5 through 7).
To check the consistency of the observed trends, we measured two sites per untreated and
annealed-only chip, and a total of four sites on two different treated chips.
The XPS data is shown in Figure 3 for the surfaces of
untreated, annealed-only, and ALE+ALD treated transmon qubit chips, and compared with blanket films of
ALD-grown Al2O3 and evaporated Al.
In the fits, up
to four characteristic binding energies (BE) can be distinguished for the Al 2p oxide components. Ranked by
increasing BE (see Figure 3(a)), these are assigned to native Al oxide, ALD-grown Al2O3, post-fabrication AlOx,
and an aluminum oxyhydroxide phase (Al-O-OH). The
differences in BE (see table in Figure 3(b)) were found to
be consistent across the measured chips and sites. The
higher BE of the oxide components for the untreated
and annealed-only devices suggests the formation of an
oxygen-rich aluminum oxide on their surface29–31. Additionally, the untreated chip shows a relatively strong AlO-OH component, which is commonly found on surfaces

===== Page 4 =====

C
Surface Chemistry
4
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
FIG. 3. (a) Al 2p, (c) C 1s, and (d) O 1s core-level XPS spectra measured on reference blanket films and transmon qubit chips.
The spectra in (a) are aligned in energy and normalized in intensity to the metallic Al 2p3/2 peak at ∼70.8 eV, and in (c)
and (d) they are calibrated to the C-C bonding feature at 284.5 eV. Dashed lines highlight the different oxidation states and
chemical bonds inferred from the relative energy shifts. Information inferred from the deconvolution of the experimental Al 2p
spectra is summarized in the table shown in (b).
subjected to wet chemical treatments.
Annealing removes most of those Al-O-OH groups, while ALE+ALD
removes all of them.
Furthermore, we find that the
ALE+ALD-treated Al surface has the thinnest oxide
layer (2.52±0.18 nm), followed by the native oxide of the
Al blanket film (2.76 ± 0.24 nm), and then the untreated
and annealed-only (3.1±0.25 nm) chips. The thinning of
the surface oxide layer of Al after ALE+ALD was confirmed by TEM-EELS, see Figure SI-8(a-d).
The fact
that the surface oxide in the ALE+ALD treated chip is
thicker than the anticipated 1-nm thick ALD-grown layer
can be attributed to the partial regrowth of a native oxide layer during the 20 seconds that the sample spends at
300◦C in the 6-7 Torr atmosphere of the process chamber
upon completion of the ALE step and prior to the start
of the ALD process32.
The deconvolution of the C 1s core level reveals three
distinct chemical environments of carbon, which, in order
of increasing BE, are: adventitious carbon or C-C bonding, C-OH or C-O-C bonding, and O=C-O bonding. The
reduced intensity of the O=C-O bonding component after annealing, but especially after ALE+ALD where it is
even weaker than in blanket Al, points to a reduction of
organic species primarily stemming from residual resist
contamination. The clear broadening of the O 1s peak
observed in the untreated chip surface can be assigned
to a contribution from adsorbed hydroxyl species such
as Al-O-OH or Al(OH)3 around 531.7 eV and adsorbed
H2O near 533 eV. These features are not observed after
annealing or ALE+ALD treatment, which is consistent
with the Al 2p data. Taken together, the XPS data shows
that the ALE+ALD treatment results in a thinner and
stoichiometric surface layer of Al2O3 with minimal polymeric contamination.
In order to gain spatially-resolved insights into this
surface modification, we used PiFM to collect infrared
spectroscopic data in the 800-1800 cm−1 range with a
∼10 nm lateral resolution. Areas of a few µm2 centered
around a junction and a portion of the Al/Si sidewall
from a readout resonator were measured on untreated
and ALE+ALD treated qubit chips. To introduce the
spectroscopic features detected on the surface of our samples, Figure 4 shows the PiFM spectra averaged over the
Si and Al regions, with each spectrum obtained by averaging 20-30 individual scans across the measured areas. The spectra are area-normalized to account for differences in absolute intensity and enable a more direct
comparison of spectral features between the two samples.

===== Page 5 =====

C
Surface Chemistry
5
FIG. 4.
Comparison of area-normalized PiFM spectra averaged across Si and Al regions measured on the untreated
and ALE+ALD-treated transmon qubit chips. Dashed lines
indicate characteristic peaks: blue for those present before
and after the treatment, red for peaks that emerged after
the treatment, and red shaded area represents the broad AlO stretching vibration appearing only after the ALE+ALD
treatment.
Dashed lines serve as visual guides for the wavenumbers
of peaks present either before and after the treatment
(blue) or only after the treatment (red), respectively. A
detailed peak assignment is provided in Table 1 in the
SI. In the untreated chip, the signal measured across
all areas is dominated by spectral features assigned to
poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA, blue dashed lines in
Figure 4)33,34, which is a resist used during liftoff and
dicing steps of our fabrication flow.
Despite soaking
the chips in a heated solution of N-methyl pyrrolidone
(NMP) followed by an acetone and isopropyl alcohol rinse
to strip the PMMA, the absence of a signal from AlOx
suggests that sufficient residual PMMA remains to form
a continuous layer of at least ∼2 nm thickness on the untreated surface. This lower bound on the residual PMMA
thickness is derived from tests conducted to estimate the
minimum thickness of a thin polymer layer that can effectively shield the infrared signal from the underlying
sample.
Conversely, we observe a broad absorbance feature
around 850-1000 cm−1 assigned to Al-O stretching
vibrations35,36 on both the resonator and junction areas
of the ALE+ALD treated chip as shown by the shaded
area in Figure 4. A peak corresponding to C-O stretching
vibrations also appears at 1020 cm−1 (red dashed line)
in the resonator area, suggesting PMMA decomposition.
Previous studies showed that, at elevated temperatures,
PMMA degrades into its monomer, MMA, which shares
similar infrared features and can further undergo random
scission around 300◦C, breaking ester bonds into smaller
fragments like C–O37,38. Additionally, we find that the
characteristic PMMA absorbance features are weaker in
the resonator area and nearly suppressed in the junction area, indicating a significant reduction in the overall
PMMA contamination. The fact that the junction surface is cleaner can be attributed to the fewer exposures
of the junction to MMA- and PMMA-containing resists
compared to the ground plane, resulting in a thinner contamination layer and a more effective removal. Alongside
these changes, a new peak appears near 1170 cm−1 (red
dashed line), attributed to C-H bending vibrations from
Al-CH3 bonds. Such features have been previously reported during the ALD or ALE reactions involving TMA
as one of the precursors35,39–41. Additionally, the selectivity of the Al2O3 growth in the nucleation regime is
highly dependent on the functionalization of the starting surface, particularly for Si42–44. This can explain the
absence of a feature corresponding to Al-O stretching in
the 850-1000 cm−1 range in the Si trench area, which suggests that no Al2O3 is formed on the Si surface. The absence of Al2O3 on the Si surface following the ALE+ALD
treatment is further confirmed by the TEM-EELS maps
shown in Figure SI-8(e).
The effectiveness of the ALE+ALD treatment in reducing PMMA contamination on both Al and Si surfaces
despite the intended selectivity of our ALE chemistry
for AlOx may seem surprising. The strong adhesion of
PMMA to aluminum and silicon oxides has been previously attributed to the bonding between PMMA and the
surface hydroxyl groups45,46. The annealing-induced removal of hydroxyl bonds, suggested by the Al 2p and O
1s XPS data for the annealed-only chips, is expected to
substantially weaken the adhesion of PMMA to both Al
and Si surfaces, making it easier for the HF used in the
ALE chemistry to indiscriminately etch the PMMA away.
The degradation of PMMA at the ALE process temperature (300◦C)47, as described above, is also anticipated
to ease the etch.
Chemical maps were measured to gain detailed insight
into the spatial uniformity of our surface treatment. Figures 5(a) and (b) present PiFM maps for untreated and
treated resonator area, respectively.
They were measured at 912 cm−1, corresponding to the Al–O stretching vibration, and normalized by the map measured at
1740 cm−1, associated with the C=O stretching vibration
in PMMA. This normalization reduces local variations
of the gap-field enhancement from topographic effects48,
which are considered to be constant across the measured
spectral range, thereby enhancing imaging contrast based
on the local ratio of Al oxide to PMMA. The raw maps
are shown in Figure SI-9.
The signal at 912 cm−1 is
barely visible in the map of the untreated surface, consistent with a uniform coverage of the aluminum oxide
by PMMA. After treatment, the surface shows a stronger
Al-O signal across the entire Al surface. This indicates
a uniform thinning of the PMMA residues revealing the
aluminum oxide underneath.

===== Page 6 =====

D
Discussion
6
FIG. 5. (a) and (b) PiFM maps measured at 912 cm−1 (characteristic of Al-O) normalized by the map measured at 1740
cm−1 (characteristic of PMMA), for untreated and treated
resonator areas, respectively.
D.
Discussion
We showed that post-fabrication ALE+ALD can improve resonator and transmon performance by treating
both top and sidewall surfaces, and provide compatibility with Al unlike conventional wet chemical treatments
like buffered oxide etchant (BOE) or triacid11,12,49. We
find that ALE+ALD treated surfaces exhibit a reduction in polymeric residues, along with a more stoichiometric Al native oxide. While our study does not disentangle the individual contributions of polymeric residue
removal and Al oxide layer modification, it establishes a
direct correlation between improved material quality at
the MA and SA interfaces and increased resonator Q and
transmon T1. The comparable improvement observed in
both the resonator and transmon Q further suggests that
the weakly coupled TLS defects located on the surfaces
of the capacitor pads limit the lifetime of our transmon
qubits.
Our findings also suggest pathways for future optimization of our process. These include incorporating a
step in the ALE process to remove the silicon oxide from
the substrate surface, gaining a deeper understanding of
the mechanism by which ALE etches organic contamination to further enhance process efficiency, and exploring
lower-loss dielectric coatings beyond Al2O3. Finally, we
find that changes in the junction also occur during the
ALE/ALD process, which can lead to large shifts in the
junction resistance; further studies are necessary to understand both the mechanism for, or source of, the resistance change, and the intrinsic variability of the change.
III.
CONCLUSION
We have demonstrated that the energy-relaxation
times of Al transmons can be systematically and durably
increased by more than two-fold using a combination of
ALE and ALD. These processes uniquely enable postfabrication surface treatment by removing fabrication
residues from all exposed surfaces and replacing the Al
native oxide from the top surface and sidewalls with a
conformal, stoichiometric Al2O3 layer. Another differentiator of this approach from other surface treatments is
the full compatibility with Al, a rarity among commonly
used native oxide etchants. The concurrent doubling of
the quality factor in Al-based resonators and transmons
subjected to the same ALE+ALD treatment suggests
that the observed improvement primarily stems from a
reduction in the density of coherence-limiting TLS defects located on the surface of the capacitor pads. These
findings establish a clear correlation between TLS loss,
transmon relaxation times, and the chemical composition
and purity of the MA and SA interfaces. They also provide a framework for continued improvements in quantum device performance through controlled, conformal,
and Al-compatible surface treatments.
IV.
METHODS
A.
Surface Treatment: ALE and ALD process
The ALE chemistry developed for this work relies on
alternating exposures of HF-pyridine and TMA at 300◦C
resulting in an etch rate of 0.5 ˚A/cycle27. The reaction
mechanism for the ALE of Al2O3 is depicted in Figure
6(a). The proposed two-half cycle reaction can be written
as follows:
Al2O∗
3 + 6HF(g) →2AlF∗
3 + 3H2O(g) ↑
(2)
2AlF∗
3 + 4Al(CH3)3(g) →6AlF(CH3)2(g) ↑
(3)
where the asterisk (*) denotes the surface species at the
end of each half-cycle. In this ALE chemistry, HF reacts with the top few monolayers of Al2O3 to form AlF3
in the first half cycle ‘A’ (equation (2)). In the second
half cycles ‘B’ (equation (3)), AlF3 is subsequently removed from the surface as AlF(CH3)2, a volatile species
at 300◦C, when reacted with TMA. Repetition of ABAB..
half cycles leads to the layer-by-layer etching.
Following the successful removal of the native Al oxide, the surface is encapsulated in situ with a thin layer
of Al2O3 via ALD. The Al2O3 ALD process involves alternating exposures of TMA and water (H2O)28 at the
same temperature of 300◦C, resulting in a growth rate
of 1 ˚A/cycle. This process begins immediately after the
ALE to minimize spontaneous re-oxidation of the underlying Al surface. The reaction mechanism for the ALD of

===== Page 7 =====

A
Surface Treatment: ALE and ALD process
7
(a)
(b)
FIG. 6. Schematic representation of (a) ALE and (b) ALD using self-limiting surface chemistry and an AB binary reaction
sequence.
Al2O3 is depicted in Figure 6(b). The proposed two-half
cycle reaction can be written as follows:
AlOH∗+ Al(CH3)3(g) →AlOAl(CH3)∗
2 + CH4(g) ↑
(4)
AlOAl(CH3)∗
2 + H2O(g) →AlOH∗+ CH4(g) ↑
(5)
The ALD surface chemistry involves formation of Al-OAl(CH3)2 surface species during the first half cycle ‘C’
(equation (4)) when Al-OH* surface species react with
TMA. In the second half cycle ‘D’ (equation (5)), these
species are converted back to Al-OH* when reacted with
H2O, ultimately leading to the formation of the Al2O3
monolayer on the surface.
The ALD and ALE processes were developed using a
Picosun/AMAT R-200 tool at 300◦C. TMA (99.9999%
purity from Strem) and HPLC grade water (H2O) were
used as the metal and the oxygen precursors for the
Al2O3 ALD process while TMA and HF-pyridine (70%
from Sigma Aldrich) served as the metal and fluorine
sources for the etching of Al2O3. All the precursors were
kept at room temperature.
High purity nitrogen (N2,
99.999% purity) was employed as the carrier gas to carry
the precursors into the reaction chamber. The process
base pressure was maintained at ∼11 hPa, with 300
sccm of N2 directed into the chamber and ∼50 sccm of
N2 through all the precursor lines. The partial pressures
of TMA, Al2O3 and HF-pyridine were maintained at 1.7
± 0.2 hPa, 2.3 ± 0.2 hPa and 4 ± 0.5 hPa, respectively.
N2 was also used as a purge gas between successive doses
of reactants. The optimized dosing sequence can be expressed as (t1 - t2 - t3 - t4), where t1 is the dose time
of TMA and t3 is the dose time of H2O or HF-pyridine,
with t2 and t4 representing intermediate purge times. All
the times are presented in seconds. The optimized dosing sequence for ALD Al2O3 was (0.2-10-0.2-10), while
the dosing sequence for ALE Al2O3 was (1-10-1-10). The
combined ALE+ALD process includes 50 cycles of Al2O3
ALE, followed by 10 cycles of Al2O3 ALD at 300◦C. The
combined recipe was applied to individual resonator and
transmon chips, enabling the in situ removal of native
Al oxide followed by encapsulation with ∼1 nm of ALD
Al2O3 without breaking vacuum.
B.
Device Fabrication
The 2D transmons and resonators were fabricated on
high-resistivity silicon (> 20 kΩ· cm) wafers, beginning
with a 10-minute remote oxygen plasma clean at 150 W
in a Tergeo asher. The first step was to deposit the Al
ground layer using a lift-off process, which began with
spin coating an adhesion promoter (SurPass 3000) and
resist (ma-N 2403), followed by baking at 90◦C, electron
beam (e-beam) lithography, and development using maD 525. The wafers were then treated with a 10-second
direct oxygen plasma exposure in an Oxford etcher and a
15-second immersion in 10:1 BOE, prior to depositing a
100-nm thick Al layer with a 10 ˚A/s growth rate under a
base pressure of 10−9 Torr in an Angstrom e-beam evaporator. The lift-off process was completed by soaking the
wafers in a hot NMP solution at 150◦C for 2 hours, followed by 5 minutes of sonication in acetone and thorough
rinsing with IPA and acetone.
For the second layer (JJ), the Al ground plane was first
exposed to a 5-minute remote oxygen plasma treatment
in a Tergeo asher. This was followed by spin coating bilayer resists (MMA EL11 and PMMA A4 950K), with
bake steps at 170◦C both before and after spin coating.
After e-beam lithography and cold development in a 3:1
IPA:H2O solution at 1.6◦C, the wafers underwent an O2
plasma descum step in an Oxford etcher. They were then

===== Page 8 =====

C
Resonator and Transmon Measurement
8
exposed to a 5-minute vapor HF treatment and loaded
into an Angstrom e-beam double angle evaporator within
5 minutes for junction deposition (same growth rate and
base pressure as the ground layer), with deposition angles of 60◦and 0◦. Finally, the resist was removed with
a 2-hour hot NMP treatment at 150◦C, followed by 5
minutes of sonication in acetone, thorough rinsing with
IPA and acetone, and a 10-minute remote oxygen plasma
treatment in a Tergeo asher to remove any residual photoresist.
Scaffold oxide features were fabricated in the next step
by exposing the wafers to a 10-minute remote oxygen
plasma treatment in a Tergeo asher, followed by spin
coating of a tri-layer resist stack (PMMA A4 950K,
PMGI SF11 and ZEP 520a) with pre- and post-spin coating bake steps at 182◦C. After e-beam lithography, the
wafers were developed sequentially in three solutions:
ZED-N50 to develop the ZEP 520a layer, MF-319 for
the PMGI SF11 layer, and 3:1 IPA:H2O mixture for the
PMMA A4 layer, followed by an O2 descum step in an
Oxford etcher. A 1 µm SiO2 layer was deposited using
an Angstrom evaporator at a growth rate of 1 ˚A/sec and
base pressure below 10−6 Torr. The oxide layer was lifted
off in a 2-hour hot NMP treatment at 150◦C, followed by
rinsing with IPA and acetone and a final 10-minute remote oxygen plasma treatment in a Tergeo asher. For
the Al airbridges, which form the final fabrication layer,
the same process was used except that the SiO2 deposition was replaced by in situ pre-deposition ion milling
and deposition of a 400-nm thick Al layer in an Angstrom
e-beam evaporator at a 10 ˚A/s growth rate and a base
pressure of 10−9 Torr.
As a final step, the wafers underwent a 10-minute remote oxygen plasma treatment in a Tergeo asher, followed by spin coating of PMMA EL11 resist and baking at 182◦C. The wafers were then diced using an ADT
dicing saw, UV-cured for 7 minutes, and subsequently
singulated and sorted. After dicing, the resist was removed with a 10-minute hot NMP bath at 150◦C, followed by rinsing with IPA and acetone and a 10-minute
remote oxygen plasma treatment in a Tergeo asher. Vapor HF treatment was used to remove the scaffold oxide, thereby releasing the airbridges and completing the
fabrication. The devices were then either subjected to
ALE+ALD treatment or left untreated as control samples before mounting on the PCB for wirebonding.
C.
Resonator and Transmon Measurement
Measurements were conducted using a vector network
analyzer (VNA) in a conventional set up to capture the
S21 transmission of the resonators in a dilution refrigerator (DR) with a base temperature of 10 mK. The input
lines consists of 75 dB total input attenuation and output line consists of a high electron mobility transistor
(HEMT) amplifier at 4K stage and a room temperature
amplifier.
To measure the resonator internal loss, we implemented a parameter-constrained diameter correction
method (PC-DCM)50,
which reduces the parameter
space in resonator data fitting and the uncertainty in
the fitting result. Key parameters such as the coupling
quality factor (Qc) and impedance mismatch angle (ϕ)
are extracted from high-power measurements and fixed
for low-power analysis, improving fitting efficiency and
robustness.
For low-power measurements, we reduced
the S21 frequency span to within one line-width of the
resonance.
The quality factors reported in this study are based on
measurements across three resonators on two devices for
both untreated control and ALE+ALD-treated samples.
The TLS-induced loss (δTLS =
1
QTLS ) is derived from
the quality factors measured at low power (1/Qi,LP,
collected at 1 photon or less) and high power (1/Qi,HP)
as δTLS =
1
QTLS =
1
Qi,LP −
1
Qi,HP .
Similar to the resonator measurements, transmon measurements were conducted using the same DR setup at a
base temperature of 10 mK. Further details on packaging
and the cryogenic setup for transmon measurements can
be found elsewhere51. T1 and T2 were estimated by fitting an exponential decay to the inversion recovery52,53
and an exponentially decaying sinusoidal to the Ramsey curve53, respectively, with each operating point measured for at least 3 hours. The measured anharmonicity
was within 10% of the design value, which is approximately 220 MHz for all transmons.
Notably, the anharmonicity remained unchanged after both ALE+ALD
treatment and annealing.
We measured transmon decoherence at various flux points away from the sweet
spot (zero flux) over a frequency range of 1.0 to 1.5 GHz
from the design value.
While the designed qubit frequencies were initially between 4 and 5.5 GHz, factors
such as junction energy mis-targeting due to fabrication
variabilities, high-temperature annealing effects, and T1
measurements taken off the sweet spot shifted the qubit
frequencies to 2.5–5 GHz.
D.
Materials Characterization
The XPS measurements were performed using a Scienta Omicron instrument, with a 300 W Al Kα X-ray
source (1486.6 eV) and a base pressure of 10−10 mbar.
The analysis area was ∼400 µm, and photoelectrons were
collected at normal take-off angle. The acquired spectra
were energy calibrated using the C 1s peak at ∼284.5
eV.
PiFM measurements were performed in ambient conditions using a VistaScope (Molecular Vista Inc.) system,
coupled with a LaserTune QCL. The system covered an
infrared spectral range from 760 to 1800 cm−1 with a
spectral resolution of 4 cm−1.
The morphology, surface oxide thickness, and elemental distribution at the Al and Si interfaces in the res-

===== Page 9 =====

D
Materials Characterization
9
onator and junction areas of our transmon devices, both
untreated and ALE+ALD treated, were imaged using
STEM-EELS. Samples were prepared via a focused ion
beam (FIB) lift-out technique, using spin-on polymer
(SOP) and electron-beam deposited platinum (e-Pt) before milling. The lamella thickness was ∼70 nm. Measurements were performed on an FEI probe-corrected TITAN operated at 200 kV, in bright-field STEM and Zcontrast high-angle annular dark-field (HAADF) STEM
modes, achieving a resolution of ∼0.78 ˚A.
V.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank the staff from across the AWS Center for
Quantum Computing (CQC) that enabled this project.
We also thank Simone Severini and Peter DeSantis for
their support of the research activities at the CQC.
∗Corresponding email address: mahuli@amazon.com
† Current affiliation: Google Research
‡ Current affiliation: National Institute of Standards and
Technology
§ Corresponding email address: jarrige@amazon.com
1 G. Wendin, “Quantum information processing with superconducting circuits:
a review,” Reports on Progress in
Physics, vol. 80, no. 10, p. 106001, 2017.
2 J. Wenner, R. Barends, R. C. Bialczak, Y. Chen, J. Kelly,
E. Lucero, M. Mariantoni, A. Megrant, P. J. J. O’Malley,
D. Sank, et al., “Surface loss simulations of superconducting coplanar waveguide resonators,” Applied Physics
Letters, vol. 99, no. 11, 2011.
3 C. Wang, C. Axline, Y. Y. Gao, T. Brecht, Y. Chu,
L. Frunzio, M. H. Devoret, and R. J. Schoelkopf, “Surface participation and dielectric loss in superconducting
qubits,” Applied Physics Letters, vol. 107, no. 16, 2015.
4 J. M. Gambetta, C. E. Murray, Y.-K.-K. Fung, D. T. McClure, O. Dial, W. Shanks, J. W. Sleight, and M. Steffen, “Investigating surface loss effects in superconducting transmon qubits,” IEEE Transactions on Applied
Superconductivity, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 1–5, 2016.
5 M. D. Reed, B. R. Johnson, A. A. Houck, L. DiCarlo, J. M.
Chow, D. I. Schuster, L. Frunzio, and R. J. Schoelkopf,
“Fast reset and suppressing spontaneous emission of a superconducting qubit,” Applied Physics Letters, vol. 96,
no. 20, 2010.
6 E. Jeffrey, D. Sank, J. Y. Mutus, T. C. White, J. Kelly,
R. Barends, Y. Chen, Z. Chen, B. Chiaro, A. Dunsworth,
et al., “Fast accurate state measurement with superconducting qubits,” Physical review letters, vol. 112, no. 19,
p. 190504, 2014.
7 C. E. Murray,
“Material matters in superconducting
qubits,” Materials Science and Engineering: R: Reports,
vol. 146, p. 100646, 2021.
8 A. P. M. Place, L. V. H. Rodgers, P. Mundada, B. M.
Smitham,
M.
Fitzpatrick,
Z.
Leng,
A.
Premkumar,
J. Bryon,
A. Vrajitoarea,
S. Sussman, et al.,
“New
material platform for superconducting transmon qubits
with coherence times exceeding 0.3 milliseconds,” Nature
communications, vol. 12, no. 1, p. 1779, 2021.
9 M. P. Bland, F. Bahrami, J. G. C. Martinez, P. H. Prestegaard, B. M. Smitham, A. Joshi, E. Hedrick, A. PakpourTabrizi, S. Kumar, A. Jindal, et al., “2D transmons with
lifetimes and coherence times exceeding 1 millisecond,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.14798, 2025.
10 W. Woods, G. Calusine, A. Melville, A. Sevi, E. Golden,
D. K. Kim, D. Rosenberg, J. L. Yoder, and W. D. Oliver,
“Determining interface dielectric losses in superconducting
coplanar-waveguide resonators,” Physical Review Applied,
vol. 12, no. 1, p. 014012, 2019.
11 M.
V.
P.
Alto´e,
A.
Banerjee,
C.
Berk,
A.
Hajr,
A. Schwartzberg, C. Song, M. Alghadeer, S. Aloni, M. J.
Elowson, J. M. Kreikebaum, et al., “Localization and mitigation of loss in niobium superconducting circuits,” PRX
Quantum, vol. 3, no. 2, p. 020312, 2022.
12 K. D. Crowley, R. A. McLellan, A. Dutta, N. Shumiya,
A. P. M. Place, X. H. Le, Y. Gang, T. Madhavan, M. P.
Bland, R. Chang, et al., “Disentangling losses in tantalum superconducting circuits,” Physical Review X, vol. 13,
no. 4, p. 041005, 2023.
13 C. J. Kopas, D. P. Goronzy, T. Pham, C. G. Torres Castanedo, M. Cheng, R. Cochrane, P. Nast, E. Lachman,
N. Z. Zhelev, A. Valli`eres, et al., “Enhanced superconducting qubit performance through ammonium fluoride etch,”
Materials for Quantum Technology, 2024.
14 D. P. Lozano, M. Mongillo, X. Piao, S. Couet, D. Wan,
Y. Canvel,
A. M. Vadiraj,
T. Ivanov,
J. Verjauw,
R. Acharya, et al., “Low-loss α-tantalum coplanar waveguide resonators on silicon wafers: fabrication, characterization and surface modification,” Materials for Quantum
Technology, vol. 4, no. 2, p. 025801, 2024.
15 C. Zhou, J. Mun, J. Yao, A. k. Anbalagan, M. D. Hossain,
R. A. McLellan, R. Li, K. Kisslinger, G. Li, X. Tong, et al.,
“Ultrathin magnesium-based coating as an efficient oxygen
barrier for superconducting circuit materials,” Advanced
Materials, vol. 36, no. 18, p. 2310280, 2024.
16 M. Bal, A. A. Murthy, S. Zhu, F. Crisa, X. You, Z. Huang,
T. Roy, J. Lee, D. v. Zanten, R. Pilipenko, et al., “Systematic improvements in transmon qubit coherence enabled by niobium surface encapsulation,” npj Quantum
Information, vol. 10, no. 1, p. 43, 2024.
17 S. K. Karuppannan, D. Huang, N. M. Kommanaboina,
K. Anil, G. Yan, D. V. M. Repaka, Y. Zhang, K. E. J.
Goh, W. S. Kai, N. L. C. Beng, et al., “Improved interface
of niobium superconducting resonator with ruthenium as
a capping layer,” ACS Applied Electronic Materials, 2024.
18 R. D. Chang, N. Shumiya, R. A. McLellan, Y. Zhang,
M. P. Bland, F. Bahrami, J. Mun, C. Zhou, K. Kisslinger,
G. Cheng, et al., “Eliminating surface oxides of superconducting circuits with noble metal encapsulation,” Physical
review letters, vol. 134, no. 9, p. 097001, 2025.
19 C. R. H. McRae, H. Wang, J. Gao, M. R. Vissers,
T. Brecht, A. Dunsworth, D. P. Pappas, and J. Mutus, “Materials loss measurements using superconducting
microwave resonators,” Review of Scientific Instruments,
vol. 91, no. 9, 2020.

===== Page 10 =====

10
20 G. Marcaud, D. Perello, C. Chen, E. Umbarkar, C. Weiland, J. Gao, S. Diez, V. Ly, N. Mahuli, N. D’Souza, et al.,
“Low-loss superconducting resonators fabricated from tantalum films grown at room temperature,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2501.09885, 2025.
21 Q.-M. Chen, M. Pfeiffer, M. Partanen, F. Fesquet, K. E.
Honasoge, F. Kronowetter, Y. Nojiri, M. Renger, K. G.
Fedorov, A. Marx, et al., “Scattering coefficients of superconducting microwave resonators. i. transfer matrix approach,” Physical Review B, vol. 106, no. 21, p. 214505,
2022.
22 P. G. Baity, C. Maclean, V. Seferai, J. Bronstein, Y. Shu,
T. Hemakumara, and M. Weides, “Circle fit optimization
for resonator quality factor measurements: Point redistribution for maximal accuracy,” Physical Review Research,
vol. 6, no. 1, p. 013329, 2024.
23 G. Calusine, A. Melville, W. Woods, R. Das, C. Stull,
V. Bolkhovsky, D. Braje, D. Hover, D. K. Kim, X. Miloshi,
et al., “Analysis and mitigation of interface losses in
trenched superconducting coplanar waveguide resonators,”
Applied Physics Letters, vol. 112, no. 6, 2018.
24 R. Barends, J. Kelly, A. Megrant, D. Sank, E. Jeffrey,
Y. Chen, Y. Yin, B. Chiaro, J. Mutus, C. Neill, et al.,
“Coherent josephson qubit suitable for scalable quantum
integrated circuits,” Physical review letters, vol. 111, no. 8,
p. 080502, 2013.
25 P. V. Klimov, J. Kelly, Z. Chen, M. Neeley, A. Megrant,
B. Burkett, R. Barends, K. Arya, B. Chiaro, Y. Chen,
et al., “Fluctuations of energy-relaxation times in superconducting qubits,” Physical review letters, vol. 121, no. 9,
p. 090502, 2018.
26 C. C Yu and H. M. Carruzzo, “Two-level systems and
the tunneling model: A critical view,” Low-temperature
Thermal And Vibrational Properties Of Disordered Solids:
A Half-century Of Universal” Anomalies” Of Glasses,
p. 113, 2022.
27 Y. Lee, J. W. DuMont, and S. M. George, “Trimethylaluminum as the metal precursor for the atomic layer etching
of Al2O3 using sequential, self-limiting thermal reactions,”
Chemistry of Materials, vol. 28, no. 9, pp. 2994–3003, 2016.
28 R. L. Puurunen, “Surface chemistry of atomic layer deposition: A case study for the trimethylaluminum/water
process,” Journal of applied physics, vol. 97, no. 12, 2005.
29 S. Prasanna, G. Krishnendu, S. Shalini, P. Biji, G. M.
Rao, S. Jayakumar, and R. Balasundaraprabhu, “Composition, structure and electrical properties of DC reactive
magnetron sputtered Al2O3 thin films,” Materials science
in semiconductor processing, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 705–711,
2013.
30 N. Reddy, P. Bera, V. R. Reddy, N. Sridhara, A. Dey,
C. Anandan, and A. K. Sharma, “XPS study of sputtered
alumina thin films,” Ceramics International, vol. 40, no. 7,
pp. 11099–11107, 2014.
31 G. A. Mengesha, J. P. Chu, B.-S. Lou, and J.-W. Lee,
“Corrosion performance of plasma electrolytic oxidation
grown oxide coating on pure aluminum:
effect of borax concentration,” Journal of Materials Research and
Technology, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 8766–8779, 2020.
32 L. Nguyen, T. Hashimoto, D. N. Zakharov, E. A. Stach,
A. P. Rooney, B. Berkels, G. E. Thompson, S. J. Haigh,
and T. L. Burnett, “Atomic-scale insights into the oxidation of aluminum,” ACS applied materials & interfaces,
vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 2230–2235, 2018.
33 G. Duan, C. Zhang, A. Li, X. Yang, L. Lu, and X. Wang,
“Preparation and characterization of mesoporous zirconia
made by using a poly (methyl methacrylate) template,”
Nanoscale research letters, vol. 3, pp. 118–122, 2008.
34 S. B. Aziz, O. G. Abdullah, M. Brza, A. K. Azawy, and
D. A. Tahir, “Effect of carbon nano-dots (CNDs) on structural and optical properties of PMMA polymer composite,” Results in Physics, vol. 15, p. 102776, 2019.
35 D. N. Goldstein, J. A. McCormick, and S. M. George,
“Al2O3 atomic layer deposition with trimethylaluminum
and ozone studied by in situ transmission FTIR spectroscopy and quadrupole mass spectrometry,” The Journal
of Physical Chemistry C, vol. 112, no. 49, pp. 19530–19539,
2008.
36 V. Vemuri, S. W. King, W. A. Lanford, J. T. Gaskins,
P. E. Hopkins, J. Van Derslice, H. Li, and N. C. Strandwitz, “Comprehensive study of the chemical, physical, and
structural evolution of molecular layer deposited alucone
films during thermal processing,” Chemistry of Materials,
vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 1916–1925, 2023.
37 T.
Kashiwagi,
A.
Inabi,
and
A.
Hamins,
“Behavior of primary radicals during thermal degradation of
poly (methyl methacrylate),” Polymer Degradation and
Stability, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 161–184, 1989.
38 L.
E.
Manring,
“Thermal
degradation
of
poly
(methyl
methacrylate).
4.
random
side-group
scission,” Macromolecules, vol. 24, no. 11, pp. 3304–3309,
1991.
39 H. A. Al-Abadleh and V. Grassian, “FT-IR study of water adsorption on aluminum oxide surfaces,” Langmuir,
vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 341–347, 2003.
40 Y. Lee, J. W. DuMont, A. S. Cavanagh, and S. M. George,
“Atomic layer deposition of AlF3 using trimethylaluminum
and hydrogen fluoride,” The Journal of Physical Chemistry
C, vol. 119, no. 25, pp. 14185–14194, 2015.
41 J. W. DuMont and S. M. George, “Competition between
Al2O3 atomic layer etching and AlF3 atomic layer deposition using sequential exposures of trimethylaluminum
and hydrogen fluoride,” The Journal of Chemical Physics,
vol. 146, no. 5, 2017.
42 G. P. Gakis, H. Vergnes, F. Cristiano, Y. Tison, C. Vahlas,
B. Caussat, A. G. Boudouvis, and E. Scheid, “In situ N2NH3 plasma pre-treatment of silicon substrate enhances
the initial growth and restricts the substrate oxidation during alumina ALD,” Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 126,
no. 12, 2019.
43 W. Xu, R. J. Gasvoda, P. C. Lemaire, K. Sharma, D. M.
Hausmann, and S. Agarwal, “Area-selective atomic layer
deposition of Al2O3 on SiNx with SiO2 as the nongrowth
surface,” Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology A,
vol. 40, no. 1, 2022.
44 W. Xu, P. C. Lemaire, K. Sharma, D. M. Hausmann,
and S. Agarwal, “Extending growth inhibition during areaselective atomic layer deposition of Al2O3 on aminosilanefunctionalized SiO2,” Chemical Communications, vol. 58,
no. 46, pp. 6650–6652, 2022.
45 E. Papirer, J.-M. Perrin, G. Nanse, and P. Fioux, “Adsorption of poly (methylmethacrylate) on an α alumina:
evidence of formation of surface carboxylate bonds,”
European polymer journal, vol. 30, no. 8, pp. 985–991,
1994.
46 J. F. Watts, S. R. Leadley, J. E. Castle, and C. J. Blomfield, “Adsorption of PMMA on oxidized Al and Si substrates: An investigation by high-resolution X-ray photo-

===== Page 11 =====

11
electron spectroscopy,” Langmuir, vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 2292–
2300, 2000.
47 M.
Ferriol,
A.
Gentilhomme,
M.
Cochez,
N.
Oget,
and J. L. Mieloszynski, “Thermal degradation of poly
(methyl methacrylate)(PMMA): modelling of DTG and
TG curves,” Polymer degradation and stability, vol. 79,
no. 2, pp. 271–281, 2003.
48 M. Almajhadi and H. K. Wickramasinghe, “Contrast and
imaging performance in photo induced force microscopy,”
Optics Express, vol. 25, no. 22, pp. 26923–26938, 2017.
49 R. A. McLellan, A. Dutta, C. Zhou, Y. Jia, C. Weiland,
X. Gui, A. P. M. Place, K. D. Crowley, X. H. Le, T. Madhavan, et al., “Chemical profiles of the oxides on tantalum
in state of the art superconducting circuits,” Advanced
Science, vol. 10, no. 21, p. 2300921, 2023.
50 C. Chen, D. Perello, S. Aghaeimeibodi, G. Marcaud, I. Jarrige, H. Lee, W. Fon, M. Matheny, and J. Gao, “Efficient
methods for extracting superconducting resonator loss in
the single-photon regime,” Journal of Applied Physics,
vol. 137, no. 4, 2025.
51 H. Levine,
A. Haim,
J. S. C. Hung,
N. Alidoust,
M. Kalaee, L. DeLorenzo, E. A. Wollack, P. ArrangoizArriola, A. Khalajhedayati, R. Sanil, et al., “Demonstrating a long-coherence dual-rail erasure qubit using tunable
transmons,” Physical Review X, vol. 14, no. 1, p. 011051,
2024.
52 Z. Wei, Y.-J. Ma, H. Jang, W. Yang, and J. Du, “To
measure T1 of short T2 species using an inversion recovery
prepared three-dimensional ultrashort echo time (3D IRUTE) method: A phantom study,” Journal of Magnetic
Resonance, vol. 314, p. 106725, 2020.
53 J. A. Monta˜nez-Barrera, M. R. von Spakovsky, C. E.
Damian Ascencio, and S. Cano-Andrade, “Decoherence
predictions in a superconducting quantum processor using the steepest-entropy-ascent quantum thermodynamics
framework,” Physical Review A, vol. 106, no. 3, p. 032426,
2022.

===== Page 12 =====

12
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION FOR “IMPROVING THE LIFETIME OF ALUMINUM-BASED
SUPERCONDUCTING QUBITS THROUGH ATOMIC LAYER ETCHING AND DEPOSITION”
OUTLINE
I. Transmon design and measurement parameters
II. Calculated Purcell curves and measured Q for individual transmons
III. Frequency shift after ALE+ALD treatment for individual transmons
IV. Transmon Q dependence as a function of frequency shift after ALE+ALD treatment
V. XPS peak fitting
VI. Estimation of Al2O3 thickness from XPS analysis
VII. TEM-EELS analysis
VIII. IR peak assignment
IX. PiFM mapping of resonator area

===== Page 13 =====

13
I.
TRANSMON DESIGN AND MEASUREMENT PARAMETERS
Five different chips, each containing four tunable transmons (Q1-Q4), were measured in the frequency range of
2.2–4.4 GHz before and after the treatment along with six additional untreated chips. One chip was also measured
before and after annealing at 300◦C under vacuum in the ALD chamber. All these chips came from two different
wafers fabricated with the same process flow. A micrograph of a transmon is shown in Figure SI-1(a). Design and
measurement parameters are summarized in the table in Figure SI-1(b).
(a)
(b)
Parameter
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Measurement f01 range (GHz)
2.3-3.9 2.6-4.4 2.4-4.3 2.9-4.9
Readout resonator frequency (GHz)
5.55
6.4
5.8
6.56
JJ length (nm)
200
200
200
200
JJ width (nm)
163
200
157
286
Capacitor width (um)
24
24
24
24
Capacitor gap (um)
30
30
30
30
Capacitor length (um)
684.2
684.2
645
631
Coupling strength (g) (MHz)
59.7
78.4
60.6
61.1
Coupling capacitance (Cg) (fF)
5.6
6.23
5.27
4.32
Qubit capacitance (Cq) (fF)
87.1
87.1
86.3
84.7
FIG. SI-1. (a) Optical micrograph of a transmon device and (b) summary of transmon design and measurement parameters.
II.
CALCULATED PURCELL CURVES AND MEASURED Q FOR INDIVIDUAL TRANSMONS
After the ALE+ALD treatment, we consistently observed a positive frequency shift across all transmon designs. As
a consequence of this frequency shift, the readout resonator Purcell loss was enhanced at the maximum f01 transmon
transition frequency. The increase in f01 contributed to the Purcell effect, which may have been a key factor behind
the observed tapering of the transmon performance at higher frequencies. To investigate this behavior further, we
calculated the Purcell curves for all four transmon designs using the experimentally determined resonator coupling
rate (κc) limits. The Purcell curves (as shown in Figure SI-2) were calculated using the following formula: The decay
time TP is given by:
TP = 2π
κc
·
gfr −f01
fr
2
(6)
where,
TP is the Purcell-limited decay time of the qubit — the rate at which the qubit loses energy due to coupling to the
readout resonator,
κc is the resonator coupling rate (external linewidth), typically defined as κc = ωr/Qc, where Qc is the coupling
quality factor, and ωr is the angular resonance frequency,
g is the qubit-resonator coupling strength, describing the strength of interaction between the two systems,
fr is the resonator frequency,
f01 is the qubit transition frequency, corresponding to the energy difference between the ground and first excited
state.
The coupling g is defined as:
g = 2πfrf01
CquCrr
· Cqu −Crr
Cqu−rr
(7)

===== Page 14 =====

14
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
FIG. SI-2. Frequency dependence of the estimated Q for each qubit design, for various untreated and ALE+ALD treated
devices, along with their calculated Purcell curves based on experimentally measured upper and lower limits of κc.
where,
Cqu is the total qubit capacitance,
Crr is the total resonator capacitance,
Cqu−rr is the coupling capacitance between the qubit and resonator,
2πfrf01 arises from quantization of the circuit Hamiltonian and reflects the energy exchange rate between the
systems.
The Purcell-limited quality factor QP is given by:
QP = 2πf01
TP
(8)
As suggested by the plots in Figure SI-2, the readout Purcell loss appears to contribute to loss for all four transmon
designs near their maximum f01 frequency. In future studies, we plan to investigate fabrication methods to minimize
treatment-induced shifts of the transmon frequency toward the readout frequency, thereby reducing the Purcell loss
in our devices.

===== Page 15 =====

15
III.
FREQUENCY SHIFT AFTER ALE+ALD TREATMENT FOR INDIVIDUAL TRANSMONS
As shown in Figure SI-3, an upward frequency shift of +500-800 MHz is consistently observed post ALE+ALD
across all studied transmon designs, independent of their untreated starting frequencies or source wafer. While we
attribute this positive frequency shift to the high processing temperatures of ALE and ALD, the exact magnitude of
this shift may be influenced by additional factors, including fabrication process variations and differences in residual
polymeric contamination on the surface prior to treatment.
FIG. SI-3. Measured upward frequency shift after ALE+ALD treatment on individual transmon designs, showing a consistent
increase of 500-800 MHz, irrespective of the untreated transmon frequency.
IV.
TRANSMON Q DEPENDENCE AS A FUNCTION OF FREQUENCY SHIFT AFTER ALE+ALD
TREATMENT
FIG. SI-4. Measured dependence of transmon Q on the absolute frequency shift for various ALE+ALD treated devices.
We observe a noticeable correlation between frequency shift and transmon quality factor Q, where the median
transmon Q decreases with increasing frequency shift, as shown in Figure SI-4.
This behavior is attributed to
enhanced readout Purcell loss as the transmon f01 approaches the readout frequency, as discussed in Section II of
the SI. Specifically, the median transmon Q decreases from approximately 4–6x106 for frequency shifts of 450 MHz
to about 2–3x106 for shifts above 700 MHz.

===== Page 16 =====

16
V.
XPS PEAK FITTING
Surface analysis was conducted on four samples using x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS): as-deposited blanket
Al film, untreated device, ALE+ALD treated device, and annealed-only device. Experimental spectra for the Al 2p,
C 1s, and O 1s core levels were individually curve-fitted after subtracting a Shirley background using CasaXPS.
A symmetric Voigt function was used for all the three components in the curve-fitting of the C 1s spectrum (Figure
SI-5), which reveals peaks at 284.5 eV corresponding to C-C and C-H bonds from adventitious carbon, ∼285.5 eV
for C-OH and C-O-C species; and ∼288.5 eV for O=C-O functional groups associated with surface oxidation or
contamination. The Al 2p core-level spectra (Figure SI-6) were analyzed with a symmetric Voigt function for oxides
and a Lorentzian asymmetric function for metallic Al. The metallic doublet positions were constrained within 0.44
eV with a 2:1 area ratio for Al 2p3/2 and Al 2p1/2. A single oxide component was identified in the as-deposited Al
film and ALE+ALD treated device, while an additional peak around 75.6 eV (Al-O-OH) appeared due to organic
or polymeric contamination in the annealed-only and untreated devices. A shift of the Al oxide component for the
annealed-only and untreated devices towards higher binding energies suggests the formation of oxygen-rich AlOx.
The deconvolution of the O 1s core-level spectra (Figure SI-7) using symmetric Voigt functions reveals the presence
of three components: ∼530.7 eV for Al-O-Al bonding, ∼531.7 eV for -OH or Al-O-OH species, and ∼533 eV for
adsorbed H2O.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
FIG. SI-5. C 1s core-level XPS spectra of (a) as-deposited blanket Al film, (b) ALE+ALD treated device, (c) annealed-only
device, and (d) untreated device.

===== Page 17 =====

17
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
FIG. SI-6. Al 2p core-level XPS spectra of (a) as-deposited blanket Al film, (b) ALE+ALD treated device, (c) annealed-only
device, and (d) untreated device.

===== Page 18 =====

18
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
FIG. SI-7. O 1s core-level XPS spectra of (a) as-deposited blanket Al film, (b) ALE+ALD treated device, (c) annealed-only
device, and (d) untreated device.
VI.
ESTIMATION OF AL2O3 THICKNESS FROM XPS ANALYSIS
The thickness of the Al2O3 layer was estimated based on the intensity ratio of the Al 2p peaks respectively corresponding to the oxide and the underlying metal in the experimental spectra. This method is based on the attenuation
of photoelectrons emitted from the metal substrate as they pass through the oxide layer. The thickness d of the Al2O3
layer can be inferred using the following equation based on the Beer-Lambert Law:
dxps(˚A) = λ0 sin θ · ln
Nmλm
N0λ0
· I0
Im
+ 1

where,
d = thickness of the Al2O3 layer
λ0 = inelastic mean free path (IMFP) of Al 2p electrons in Al2O3
λm = IMFP of Al 2p electrons in metallic Al
θ = take off angle
Im = XPS intensity of metallic Al 2p peak
I0 = XPS intensity of oxidized Al 2p peak
Nm = Atomic density of metallic Al
N0 = Atomic density of metallic Al2O3

===== Page 19 =====

19
The XPS intensity was determined from the total area under the curve of the Al 2p core level for the metallic and
oxide components. Using the above equation with a take-off angle of 90 degrees, and λ0 and λm values of 28 ˚A and 26
˚A for Al oxide and Al metal, respectively, along with an Nm:N0 ratio of 1.5, the thickness was estimated for different
samples and several locations on each chip as shown in Figure 3(b) of the main text.
VII.
TEM-EELS ANALYSIS
We performed imaging of the JJ and resonator areas to study the surface oxide layers using transmission electron
microscopy and electron energy loss spectroscopy (TEM-EELS), as shown in Figure SI-8(a-d). The thicknesses of the
surface Al oxide layers were found to be consistent with XPS estimations: 2.5 ± 0.2 nm for the ALE+ALD treated
chip and in the 3.1 ± 0.2 nm for the untreated chip. This confirms a measurable reduction in the oxide layer thickness
of the treated chip, and underscores the uniformity of the treatment’s effect on the surface oxide layer. The oxide
thickness was estimated by averaging measurements from 25 locations across all the images shown in Figure SI-8 using
the software ImageJ. For each chip, the O/Al ratio was also estimated based on an EELS map collected across the
surface oxide layer. This ratio was estimated to be approximately 1.5 for both chips, suggesting that the differences
in oxidation state identified via XPS are either too small to be detected just by TEM-EELS spectral mapping alone
or have been further minimized by the lamella preparation process used for TEM. Additionally, EELS maps (Figure
SI-8(f-h)) measured on exposed Si areas next to the resonators indicate that the native silicon oxide is not capped by
Al2O3, which is consistent with the PiFM data.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
FIG. SI-8. (a-d) High-resolution scanning-TEM images of the vicinity of the surface of the the JJ top electrode and read-out
resonator trace on untreated and treated devices. (e) S-TEM image of the Si trench region in the ALE+ALD-treated resonator,
alongwith TEM-EELS elemental maps for (f) Al, (g) Si and (h) O, showing the absence of detectable Al2O3 on the exposed Si
surface.
VIII.
IR PEAK ASSIGNMENT
Table I summarizes the peak assignments for all peaks identified in the Al and Si regions of the resonators and
junctions on both untreated and treated surfaces.

===== Page 20 =====

20
Peak Assignment
Wavenumbers (cm−1)
Untreated
ALE+ALD Treated
Resonator Junction Resonator-Al trace Resonator-Si trench Junction
Al-O stretching vibration
-
-
800-1000
-
800-1000
C-O stretching vibration from PMMA
-
-
1020
1020
-
C-O-C stretching vibration from PMMA
1150
1150
-
-
-
C-H bending vibration from Al-CH3
-
-
1170
1170
1170
C-O-C stretching vibration from PMMA
1197
1197
1197
1197
-
C-O-C stretching vibration from PMMA
1240
1240
-
-
-
C-O-C stretching vibration from PMMA
1265
1265
1265
1265
1265
CHx bending deformation
1378
1378
1378
1378
1378
CHx bending deformation
1445
1445
1445
1445
1445
CHx bending deformation
1466
1466
1466
1466
1466
C=O stretching vibration from PMMA
1740
1740
1740
1740
-
TABLE I. Infrared spectra peak assignments for untreated and ALE+ALD treated devices.
IX.
PIFM MAPPING OF RESONATOR AREA
In this section, we present raw PiFM maps (Figure SI-9) of the resonator area for ALE+ALD-treated devices,
acquired at 912 cm−1 and 1740 cm−1, corresponding to the Al–O stretching vibration and the C=O stretching
vibration in PMMA, respectively.
(a)
(b)
FIG. SI-9. PiFM maps at the resontor area shown with a color scale highlighting the 912 cm−1 and 1740 cm−1 wavenumbers,
which respectively correspond to Al-O bonds and C=O stretching vibration in PMMA
