

===== Page 1 =====

Proceedings of the CTD/WIT 2019
PROC-CTD19-112
October 15, 2019
Silicon detectors for the LHC Phase-II upgrade and beyond.
RD50 status report
Marco Mandurrino
On behalf of the RD50 Collaboration,
CERN, Geneva, Switzerland
ABSTRACT
It is foreseen to signiﬁcantly increase the luminosity of the LHC by upgrading
towards the HL-LHC (High-Luminosity LHC) in order to harvest the maximum
physics potential. Especially the Phase-II-Upgrade foreseen for 2023 will mean
unprecedented radiation levels, signiﬁcantly beyond the limits of the Silicon
trackers currently employed. All-Silicon central trackers are being studied in
ATLAS, CMS and LHCb, with extremely radiation-hard Silicon sensors to be
employed on the innermost layers. Within the RD50 Collaboration, a large R&D
program has been underway for more than a decade across experimental
boundaries to develop Silicon sensors with suﬃcient radiation tolerance for
HL-LHC trackers. Key areas of recent RD50 research include new sensor
fabrication technologies such as High-Voltage (HV)-CMOS, exploiting the wide
availability of the CMOS process in the semiconductor industry at very
competitive prices compared to the highly specialized foundries that normally
produce particle detectors on small wafers. We also seek for a deeper
understanding of the connection between the macroscopic sensor properties such
as radiation-induced increase of leakage current, doping concentration and
trapping, and the microscopic properties at the defect level. Another strong
activity is the development of advanced sensor types like 3D Silicon detectors,
designed for the extreme radiation levels expected for the vertexing layers at the
HL-LHC. A further focus area is the ﬁeld of Low-Gain Avalanche Detectors
(LGADs), where a dedicated multiplication layer to create a high ﬁeld region is
built into the sensor. LGADs are characterized by a high signal also after
irradiation and a very fast signal compared to traditional Silicon detectors with
make them ideal candidates for ATLAS and CMS timing layers in the HL-LHC.
We will present the state of the art in several Silicon detector technologies as
outlined above and at radiation levels corresponding to HL-LHC ﬂuences and
partially beyond.
PRESENTED AT
Connecting the Dots and Workshop on Intelligent Trackers (CTD/WIT 2019)
Instituto de F´ısica Corpuscular (IFIC), Valencia, Spain
April 2-5, 2019
arXiv:1910.06045v1  [physics.ins-det]  14 Oct 2019

===== Page 2 =====

Connecting the Dots and Workshop on Intelligent Trackers. IFIC (Valencia). April 2-5, 2019
1
Introduction
The RD50 Collaboration is a CERN community devoted to the development of radiation-hard semiconductor devices for very-high-luminosity colliders which brings together experts from more than 60 institutes all
over the world, such as solid-state physicists, device physicists, experts of radiation-matter interactions, high
energy physicists, electronics system designers, ASICs designers and sensor foundries. This community has
learned to work towards common goals, developing methods, tools and standards that are world reference
for the domain. Thanks to this vast expertise, RD50 put the unsurpassed basis of the R&D towards sensor
solution for future challenges in several ﬁelds. To this aim, the Collaboration has been organized in four
complementary divisions, working in parallel and synergistically, in a sort of bottom-up approach: we have
the characterization of materials and their defects (due to production processes or radiation) and, due to the
capability to design and produce devices, we are also devoted to the characterization of detectors, then we
ﬁnd the realization of new structures and, ﬁnally, full detector systems. The microscopic analysis of Silicon
and other materials through their standard, defect-engineered properties, both pre- and post-irradiation, is
essential to the reﬁnement of several physics-based models involved in the simulation and design of particle
detectors. By characterizing the test structures, through large data sets of I(V ), C(V ) and charge collection
curves, after irradiation (up to ﬂuences where this is still relevant) and annealing, we parametrize their evolution and optimize such models. Among the main RD50 achievements from 2002 we have the development
of the p-type Silicon strip and pixel technology, as well as LGAD (Low-Gain Avalanche Diodes), double
column 3D detectors and the demonstration of the performance of planar segmented sensors to the maximum ﬂuences anticipated for the HL-LHC (3 · 1016 neq/cm2). Also noticeable is the extensive evaluation of
defect engineered Silicon and other semiconductor materials and characterization, with the identiﬁcation of
defects responsible for the degradation of various detectors ﬁgure-of-merit deﬁning the state-of-the-art in the
corresponding solid-state community. Moreover, we developed several unique characterization methods and
systems for sensor and material analyses, such as the Transient Current Technique (TCT) [1], edge-TCT,
Two-Photon Absorption-TCT (TPA-TCT), the ALiBaVa readout system, besides many other standardized
measurement and analyses procedures which now are partly marketed through spin-oﬀcompanies. Finally,
RD50 also boasts the data collection and development of damage parameters/models essential for sensor
design (for instance, as TCAD input data) and for planning the scenarios of future HEP experiments and
their upgrades, in very close links to the current LHC experiments and their upgrades.
2
Radiation damage and defects characterization
The main goals of the activities focusing on material and defects characterization are the identiﬁcation of
defects responsible for trapping, leakage current, change of charge collection eﬃciency (CCE), eﬀective doping concentrations or electric ﬁeld, the evaluation of any possible positive implication of such knowledge to
mitigate radiation damage eﬀects and the delivery of input device simulations to predict detector performance under various conditions, also by providing irradiated samples. As a result of all these activities, a
full-comprehensive energy map of the most relevant defects in Silicon has been set up (see Figure 1), allowing
noticeable progresses in the knowledge about the occurrence of increased generation or leakage currents, trapping or CCE degradation. The speciﬁc analysis which allowed such step forward in characterizing defects
are several and include capacitance-Deep-Level Transient Spectroscopy (c-DLTS), Thermally Stimulated
Currents (TSC), Photo-Induced Transient Spectroscopy (PITS), Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy
(FTIR) and the already mentioned TCT.
In Figure 1 one may see the most important defect levels in Silicon, which is the converging result of a
consistent set of data observed after π, neutron, proton, photon and electron irradiation campaigns. The
introduction rate of such defects is depending on particle type, energy and, to some extent, on materials.
Particularly noticeable is the indication that E205a and H125 are important in the trapping process, while
some deep acceptors (like H116) and shallow donors (e.g. E30) may alter the space charge. Moreover, there
are several evidences that some defects, only seen in p-type (Boron containing) materials, participate to the
acceptor removal (or de-activation) mechanism involving BiOi complexes.
In the following we brieﬂy review some relevant RD50 activities belonging to the ﬁeld of material charac1

===== Page 3 =====

Connecting the Dots and Workshop on Intelligent Trackers. IFIC (Valencia). April 2-5, 2019
Figure 1: Picture of the most important defect levels populating the energy bandgap in Silicon (along with
the indication of their typical charge). Levels P(0/+), close to the conduction band, and B(0/-), just above
the valence band energy, correspond to the n- and p-type dopants, respectively.
terization. The ﬁrst one is the well-known Hamburg model, a milestone in the knowledge of defects properties
and their behavior as a function of ﬂuence φ (in units of neutrons equivalent per cm2) and annealing time
t. According to the model, which has been extensively validated with laboratory measurements for diﬀerent
Silicon substrates and experimental setup, the eﬀective doping concentration is subject to a perturbation,
whose magnitude
∆Neﬀ(φ, t) = Neﬀ(0) −Neﬀ(φ, t)
= Na(φ, t) + NC(φ) + NY(φ, t)
(1)
is a function of three diﬀerent terms: (i) the short-term annealing
Na(φ, t) = φ
X
i
[ga,i · exp (−t/τi)] ,
(2)
which describes a ﬁrst-order decay of acceptors, proportional to the ﬂuence, (ii) the stable damage
NC(φ) = NC,0 · [exp (−c · φ)] + gC · φ ,
(3)
modeling the donor de-activation and the introduction of stable acceptor-like defects, then (iii) the long-term
reverse annealing contribution
NY(φ, t) = NY,∞(φ) ·

1 −
τ
1 + t

,
(4)
with NY,∞(φ) = gY · φ, a second-order parametrization, independent of ﬂuence. The terms ga, gC and gY
are constant, and are indicated in Figure 2.
The Hamburg model represents the perfect example of successful interaction between data acquisition,
parametric analysis and physical modeling, which is demonstrated by its vast use over the entire community
working on Silicon detectors.
The second characterization activity we present consists in the so-called NitroStrip, a project working
on nitrogen-enriched Silicon. As reported in several publications (see, for instance, Ref [2]) there is the
experimental evidence that, in n-type Float Zone (FZ) substrates irradiated at φ = 5 · 1014 neq/cm2, the
trap density is lower in samples with high nitrogen concentration. This could be due to several mechanisms
reported in the literature involving the kinetics of N2 complexes in Silicon, such as the vacancy suppression
or the interstitial suppression [3].
As the last examples of ongoing activities we have to mention the very interesting results coming
from mixed irradiation campaigns [4].
By irradiating magnetic-Czochralski (MCZ) n-type substrates at
φ = 3 · 1014 neq/cm2 with 23 MeV protons from Karlsruher Institut f¨ur Technologie (KIT), Germany, and
then with neutrons from Jozef Stefan Institute (JSI) in Ljubljana at the same ﬂuence, it has been obtained
2

===== Page 4 =====

Connecting the Dots and Workshop on Intelligent Trackers. IFIC (Valencia). April 2-5, 2019
Figure 2: Trend of ∆Neﬀ(φ, t) = Neﬀ(0) −Neﬀ(φ, t) versus the annealing time t, whose parametrization is
known as the Hamburg model.
a leakage current which is larger than what observed by inverting the order of these two irradiations. Moreover, in the case of using ﬁrst neutrons and then protons, the leakage current decreases after the second
irradiation. Being a completely unexpected result, further analyses are needed.
3
Detectors characterization
Since radiation-related defects may aﬀect the detectors behavior, it is necessary to transfer all the knowledges
coming from the material characterization to the device design. Not only the leakage current and other static
characteristics are modiﬁed after the irradiation (as we have just seen with the NitroStrip project) but also
the detector dynamics can be involved.
In general, the defects introduced by the radiation may act as
trapping centers for the charge carriers. As a result, the signals due to the passage of an ionizing particle
can be broadened in time and then degraded, especially for timing applications. When the eﬀective trapping
time becomes of the order of the electron/hole drift time (∼5-20 ns) the charge integrated at the electrodes
by the front-end electronics is reduced. Such reduction is inversely proportional to the ﬂuence:
Qe,h(φ, t) = Q0
e,h · exp

−
t
τeﬀe,h

= Q0
e,h · exp (−βe,h(T, t) · φ) ,
(5)
where Q0
e,h is the electron/hole charge before irradiation and τeﬀe,h the eﬀective trapping time.
So, besides standard analysis of devices, like the static I(V ) or C(V ) curves, RD50 necessarily provides
also dynamic characterizations. A virtuous example comes from the TCT measurements. By stimulating
the detector with a pulsed IR laser beam (typically λ ∼1060 nm) with a few-micron spot size, one is able to
produce the ionization of lattice atoms along all the sample thickness and, in particular, to mimic the eﬀects
of a Minimum Ionizing Particle (MIP) traveling throughout the sensor. This is especially useful to probe
the performance of Low-Gain Avalanche Diodes (LGAD), that have segmented active areas: when the laser
illuminates the implants producing charge multiplication, an ampliﬁcation of the output signal is observed,
and by comparing gain and no-gain signals it is possible to reconstruct the response distribution along
the whole sensor and measure the width of the inter-pixel region, very useful to perform ﬁll-factor studies.
Figure 3 shows, on the left, the 2D map of collected charges obtained with the TCT setup by integrating
the signals of a 2×2 LGAD from the UFSD3 production run by Fondazione Bruno Kessler (FBK), Italy. [5].
This is for what concerns the scan of the detector’s properties along the illumination surface. All the
physical quantities of interest that are functions of depth can be investigated through diﬀerent methods:
for instance, with the edge-TCT (same setup as the previous one) the laser probes laterally the border of
the device and by varying the position it is possible to obtain information about the collected charges or
the electric ﬁeld at diﬀerent depths from the detector surface. Another technique is the top-Two-Photon
3

===== Page 5 =====

Connecting the Dots and Workshop on Intelligent Trackers. IFIC (Valencia). April 2-5, 2019
Absorption, which exploits a high-intensity pulsed mode-locked laser to obtain time coincidence and a microfocusing system to have the space overlap essential to reach a proper energy conﬁnement. In the right
plot of Figure 3 there is an example of TPA applied to an LGAD sample, carried out at CERN [6, 7], where
the incident beam is ellipsoidal with a longitudinal dimension of the focus σ = 13 µm (gaussian). Shifting
it from the top of the LGAD to the bottom it is possible to extract the electric ﬁeld or the collected charge,
as one may see in the picture.
Figure 3: Left: 2D map reconstructing the integrated charge in a 2×2 LGAD sensor module from the UFSD3
run by FBK [5] with the TCT setup. Right: collected charge as a function of depth in an LGAD measured
with the top-Two-Photon Absorption technique.
Detector characterization not only means measuring real devices but also designing new ones.
This
step is achieved mostly through the numerical simulation, like in the Technology Computer-Aided Design
(TCAD) approach. To simulate particle detectors, besides the usual mathematical framework based on the
Drift-Diﬀusion (DD) method, we also need proper physics-based models able to reproduce and predict the
behavior of real structures, both by the electrostatic and radiation-hardness performances. To this aim,
RD50 has a dedicated community of experts in modeling and simulations of processes and devices, that can
transfer and use the information coming from experimental data as TCAD input parameters. Calibrating
the physical models involved allows to design, develop and optimize devices, according to all the possible
conditions (sensor design and material, irradiation ﬂuence and particle type, annealing, and so on) and in
close collaboration with other simulation groups (like CMS and ATLAS).
Figure 4: Left: simulated (lines) and measured (symbols) bias voltage needed to collect 20 kelectrons as a
function of ﬂuence in various 50 µm thick LGAD by CNM and HPH. Top-right: ﬁeld color map and drift lines
as simulated in a inter-pad region between two LGAD. Bottom-right: simulated(solid black)/measured(light
blue) collected charge scan versus position in the inter-strip region of an LGAD detector from FBK, Trento.
The main targets of the TCAD design approach are the proper modeling of the electrical behavior (I(V, T) and C(V, T) curves, breakdown, depletion voltage), the prediction of ﬁeld/mobility, charge
generation (and/or multiplication) and radiation damage eﬀects (surface/bulk defects, trapping, acceptor
de-activation).
4

===== Page 6 =====

Connecting the Dots and Workshop on Intelligent Trackers. IFIC (Valencia). April 2-5, 2019
Figure 4 shows some examples of TCAD simulations of LGAD structures [8]: on the left we reported
the comparison between simulated and measured voltage to have 20 kelectrons versus ﬂuence in several
50 µm thick LGAD by Centro Nacional de Microelectr´onica (CNM), Spain, and Hamamatsu Photonics
K. K. (HPK), Japan. Measurements are taken with the TCT while the simulation accounts for three diﬀerent
charge multiplication models: the Okuto-Crowell, van Overstraeten-de Man and Massey (see Ref [9]). This
represents a clear example of model calibration since by comparing calculated and experimental data is
possible to reﬁne the physical input parameters.
On the top-right picture, there is a simulated LGAD
cross-section with the electric ﬁeld color map and drift lines. Such studies allow to optimize the termination
structures between neighboring active areas. Finally, the bottom-right plot shows measured (edge-TCT)
and simulated (with Massey model for charge multiplication) signal scan between two adjacent LGAD, very
useful to deﬁne the detector overall ﬁll-factor, a critical parameter of timing trackers in future high-luminosity
colliders.
4
Novel structures and technologies
Besides the investigation on materials and existing detectors, the RD50 Collaboration also takes particular
care of designing and developing novel structures and full-detection systems. Thanks to the close collaboration with the other experiments at CERN, this last R&D program is always ongoing, and represents one
of the most advanced and challenging activities, especially for what concerns the prediction of detectors
performances at very-high ﬂuences.
Among the novel technologies we ﬁnd the 3D and planar (strip/pixel) detectors. The ﬁrst ones have been
proposed by S. I. Parker and C. Kennedy in 1997 [10] and are based on the implementation of vertical column
electrodes penetrating inside the detector bulk.
Their development, nowadays carried out by two main
producers (FBK and CNM), has been mainly focused on innermost pixel layers of the ATLAS experiment
(especially for the Insertable B-Layer, IBL) plus several joint MPW productions with CMS and LHCb. Due to
their design, the main detector ﬁgures-of-merit are a low depletion voltage (i.e., low power dissipation), charge
drift decoupled from particle track (allowing short collection time), low drift path (so, reduced trapping) and
reduced charge sharing. Despite their quite complicate fabrication process, that can be both double- and
single-sided, they demonstrated noticeable eﬃciency even up to a ﬂuence of ∼3 · 1016 neq/cm2 (see Figure 5
and Ref. [11]) and also good time resolution: σt ∼30 ps at Vbias > 100 V and T = −20◦C [12].
Figure 5: Left-middle: cross-sections of a double- and single-sided-process 3D detector, respectively. Right:
voltage needed to have 97% eﬃciency as a function of ﬂuence in several 3D detectors [11].
Other novel structures developed within the RD50 framework are the High-Voltage (HV)-CMOS, consisting in depleted active pixel detectors realized with the CMOS process. Their sensitive element are deep
n-wells in (usually) low resistivity (∼10 Ω·cm) p-type substrates, on handle carriers that can be thinned
down. The main charge collection mechanism is the drift, and it takes place in a very thin depletion region (∼10-20 µm). Typically a depleted thickness of ∼10 µm at ∼60 V may lead to charge collection of
∼1000 electrons. For what concerns their radiation-related performances, edge-TCT measurements demonstrate that, due to the trapping eﬀect, they partly loose the diﬀusion component of the signal when irradiated
5

===== Page 7 =====

Connecting the Dots and Workshop on Intelligent Trackers. IFIC (Valencia). April 2-5, 2019
up to ∼1015 neq/cm2. Then, from 1 to some units of 1015 neq/cm2 the CCE rises again even above the initial (not-irradiated) value, due to acceptor de-activation. Finally, at higher ﬂuence, there is a second CCE
degradation, induced by an increase of Neﬀin the space charge region and the subsequent trapping [13]. As
already demonstrated in Ref. [14], their acceptor de-activation is quite similar to what observed in LGAD
structures.
Before introducing the last topics of this work, we want to spend few words on one of the most interesting results in combining sensor and readout electronics, both developed within the RD50 framework. A
full-detector system prototype for HL-LHC composed by coupling the RD53A chip to a 3D pixel sensor
has been tested on the SPS beam at CERN (120 GeV π+/p). Eﬃciency maps collected at 0◦tilting angle
demonstrated that, even after a ﬂuence of 1016 neq/cm2, all tested samples lost only less than 1% of their
initial eﬃciency before irradiation [15, 16].
To the aim of developing planar sensors for timing applications, RD50 introduced the LGAD technology.
The ﬁrst samples were designed and produced by CNM in 2014 [17], and actually they are produced also
by FBK and HPK, with a strong participation of the Italian INFN institute. LGAD ensure large and fast
signals with a high S/N ratio, being based on the internal multiplication mechanism provided in reverse-bias
conditions by a p+-type layer, implanted just beneath the n-cathode. A limit of the standard LGAD technology is the way to obtain the spatial resolution required by timing applications in high-energy physics
experiments. Being each active area surrounded by proper termination structures, ensuring electrostatic isolation and conﬁning the high multiplication ﬁelds, such devices are characterized by the so-called dead-area,
i.e. a region where there is no multiplication. These area induces a degradation of the overall eﬃciency of
the detector, reﬂecting on the timing performances. To overcome this issue, RD50 is implementing various
alternative solutions. Among the most interesting ones there is the use of high-aspect-ratio isolation trenches
in place of termination implants to properly control the electric ﬁeld while minimizing the impact of having
a dead-area. A second and quite elegant solution are the “RSD” and “AC-LGAD” projects [18, 19], aiming
at introducing the resistive AC-coupled readout paradigm, where multiplied charges are freezed in a resistive
layer before being completely induced on proper capacitively coupled pads. The advantage of this technology
is the use of continuous gain layers throughout the whole sensor, without the presence of any no-gain zone.
Some samples have been already produced by CNM while a new run has been recently released by FBK in
the collaboration framework with INFN Torino, Italy.
Devices based on the LGAD technology have now been chosen to be the ﬁnal detectors for the timing
upgrades at HL-LHC. But in this case the acceptor de-activation is particularly critical since most of the
Boron inactivated comes from the multiplication layer. The result is that with the increasing of ﬂuence
the collected charge and, thus, the signal experience a signiﬁcant degradation due to the gain loss. Consequently, the time resolution increases. To mitigate the de-activation both CNM and FBK developed LGAD
with the co-implantation of Carbon in the multiplication layer or with the Gallium in place of Boron as a
dopant atom of the p+-type implant. If satisfactory results have been obtained with Carbon, since it seems
that the interstitials complexes between Silicon and Carbon prevent the Boron de-activation, no signiﬁcant
improvements come from the Gallium [20].
The challenging question we would actually like to answer is: will our Silicon detectors still be alive beyond
the ﬁnal limit of φ > 1017 neq/cm2? Some evidences say that very-high-ﬂuences mean increase of trapping
up to a certain radiation level, after that the traps production saturates and their concentration remains
almost constant with ﬂuence. To get rid of the high density of defects, one could in principle make even
more thin devices. But the drawback is linked to the lower signals. Some possible solutions are, (i) again,
the inclusion of a multiplication layer (thin LGAD), or (ii) decouple drift path and total charge deposition
(3D detectors). But the radiation up to 7 · 1017 neq/cm2 (as expected in FCC) still remains challenging and
imposes new material/detectors characterizations and models.
References
[1] V. Eremin et al., “Development of transient current and charge techniques for the measurement of
eﬀective net concentration of ionized charges (Neﬀ) in the space charge region of p-n junction detectors”,
Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, 372(3), 388–398 (1993), DOI: 10.1016/0168-9002(95)01295-8
6

===== Page 8 =====

Connecting the Dots and Workshop on Intelligent Trackers. IFIC (Valencia). April 2-5, 2019
[2] P. Kaminski et al., “First results on properties and concentrations of radiation defect centers in nitrogenenriched, high-resistivity FZ silicon”, 25th RD50 Workshop, CERN, Nov 2014
[3] W. von Ammon et al., “The impact of nitrogen on the defect aggregation in silicon”, J. Cryst. Growth
226(1), 19–30 (2001), DOI: 10.1016/S0022-0248(01)01277-5
[4] J.-O. Gosewisch et al., “Sequence dependent mixed irradiations”, 33rd RD50 Workshop, CERN, Nov
2018
[5] F. Siviero et al., “Innovative TCT studies on the breakdown of UFSD3 sensors by FBK”, 33rd RD50
Workshop, CERN, Nov 2018
[6] G. Casse (on behalf of RD50 Collaboration), “RD50 status report”, 27th International Workshop on
Vertex Detectors (VERTEX 2018), Chennai, India, Oct 2018
[7] M. Fernandez Garcia et al., “High resolution three dimensional characterization of irradiated silicon
detectors using a Two Photon Absorption-TCT”, 15th Vienna Conference on Instrumentation (VCI
2019), Vienna, Feb 2019
[8] M. Mandurrino et al., “Progresses in LGAD simulation and comparison with experimental data from
UFSD2, the new 50-micron production at FBK”, 31st RD50 Workshop, CERN, Nov 2017
[9] M. Mandurrino et al., “Numerical simulation of charge multiplication in Ultra-Fast Silicon Detectors
(UFSD) and comparison with experimental data”, 2017 IEEE Nuclear Science Symposium and Medical
Imaging Conference (NSS/MIC), Atlanta, Oct 2017, DOI: 10.1109/NSSMIC.2017.8532702
[10] S. I. Parker et al., “3D - A proposed new architecture for solid-state radiation detectors”, Nucl. Inst.
Meth. A 395(3), 328–343 (1997), DOI: 10.1016/S0168-9002(97)00694-3
[11] J. Lange et al., “Radiation hardness of small-pitch 3D pixel sensors up to a ﬂuence of 3×1016 neq/cm2”,
J. Inst. 13(9), P09009 (2018), DOI: 10.1088/1748-0221/13/09/P09009
[12] G. Kramberger et al., “Timing performance of small cell 3D silicon detectors”, 14th “Trento” Workshop
on Advanced Silicon Radiation Detectors (TREDI 2019), Trento, Feb 2019
[13] A. Aﬀolder et al., “Charge collection studies in irradiated HV-CMOS particle detectors”, J. Inst. 11(4),
P04007 (2016), DOI: 10.1088/1748-0221/11/04/P04007
[14] I. Mandi´c et al., “Irradiation study of CMOS pixel detector structures on RD50-MPW1 chips from
LFoundry”, 33rd RD50 Workshop, CERN, Nov 2018
[15] A. G. Alonso et al., “Test beam characterization of irradiated (1E16n eq/cm2) 3D pixel sensors readout
with the RD53A ROC”, 33rd RD50 Workshop, CERN, Nov 2018
[16] G. Giannini et al., “3D silicon sensors for ATLAS ITk pixel detector”, 33rd RD50 Workshop, CERN,
Nov 2018
[17] G. Pellegrini et al., “Technology developments and ﬁrst measurements of Low Gain Avalanche Detectors
(LGAD) for high energy physics applications”, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, 756(21), 12–16
(2014), DOI: 10.1016/j.nima.2014.06.008
[18] M. Mandurrino et al., “Resistive AC-Coupling: a new read-out paradigm in 4D tracking with Ultra-Fast
Silicon Detectors”, 13th “Trento” Workshop on Advanced Silicon Radiation Detectors (TREDI 2018),
Trento, Feb 2018
[19] H. F.-W. Sadrozinski et al., “Progress on AC-LGAD”, 31st RD50 Workshop, CERN, Nov 2017
[20] M. Ferrero et al., “Radiation resistant LGAD design”, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, 919(3),
16–26 (2017), DOI: 0.1016/j.nima.2018.11.121
7
