

===== Page 1 =====

Native-oxide-passivated trilayer junctions for superconducting qubits
Pankaj Sethi,1, ∗Om Prakash,1, † Jukka-Pekka Kaikkonen,1 Mikael Kervinen,1 Elsa
T. Mannila,1 M´ario Ribeiro,1, ‡ Debopam Datta,1 Christopher W. F¨orbom,1 Jorden
Senior,1 Renan P. Loreto,1 Joel H¨atinen,1 Klaara Viisanen,1 Jukka I. V¨ayrynen,2 Alberto
Ronzani,1 Antti Kemppinen,1 Visa Vesterinen,1, ‡ Mika Prunnila,1 and Joonas Govenius1, §
1VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland Ltd,
QTF Centre of Excellence, P.O. Box 1000, FI-02044 VTT, Finland
2Department of Physics and Astronomy, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, USA
(Dated: December 1, 2025)
Superconducting qubits in today’s quantum processing units are typically fabricated with angleevaporated aluminum–aluminum-oxide–aluminum Josephson junctions. However, there is a need
for higher yield and tighter parameter control when scaling up the number of qubits and junctions into tens of thousands and beyond.
Fabrication methods based on subtractive patterning
of superconductor–insulator–superconductor trilayers, used for more classical large-scale Josephson
junction circuits, could provide the solution but they in turn often suffer from lossy dielectrics incompatible with high qubit coherence. In this work, we utilize native aluminum oxide as a sidewall
passivation layer for junctions based on aluminum–aluminum-oxide–niobium trilayers, and use such
junctions in qubits. We design the fabrication process such that the few-nanometer-thin native oxide
is not exposed to oxide removal steps that could increase its defect density or hinder its ability to
prevent shorting between the leads of the junction. With these junctions, we design and fabricate
transmon-like qubits and measure time-averaged coherence times up to 30 µs at a qubit frequency
of 5 GHz, corresponding to a qubit quality factor of one million.
Our process uses subtractive
patterning and optical lithography on wafer scale, enabling high throughput in patterning. This approach provides a scalable path toward fabrication of superconducting qubits on industry-standard
platforms.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Superconducting tunnel junctions are a key element
providing non-linearity to many circuits in the field of
low-temperature sensors and electronics.
Several approaches to their fabrication exist, optimized for different
applications. Most of the approaches fall into the category of angle-evaporation combined with lift-off [1, 2] or
superconductor–insulator–superconductor trilayers combined with subtractive patterning [3–5]. Superconducting qubits use the former almost exclusively because,
so far, approaches based on lift-off and electron-beam
lithography have produced more ideal low-loss junctions
in the sense of introducing less material capable of absorbing energy at the qubit frequency. Furthermore, so
far, high-gate-fidelity superconducting quantum processing units have contained at most a few hundred junctions, such that parameter control achieved with angleevaporation and lift-off has been acceptable.
To our
knowledge, the best reported wafer-level failure rates are
in the range of 0.1 to 1%, when defining only short and
open circuits as failures [6, 7].
The trilayer-based approach is, on the other hand, prevalent in more classical
∗pankaj.sethi@vtt.fi
† Present address: Department of Physics and Astrophysics, University of Delhi, New Delhi 110007, India
‡ Present address: Arctic Instruments, Tekniikantie 14, FI-02150
Espoo, Finland
§ Present address: Arctic Instruments, Tekniikantie 14, FI-02150
Espoo, Finland; joonas@arcticinst.io
applications of superconducting junctions, such as magnetometers, current amplifiers, and single-flux quantum
circuits.
These applications often require a very large
number of junctions and tight parameter tolerances [5],
and therefore the superior yield, reproducibility, and lack
of aging in the approach based on trilayers and subtractive patterning are essential. Superconducting quantum
processors are expected to reach a similar scale in terms
of number of junctions in the next years, therefore making it a pressing problem to develop trilayer-based junctions with qubit-compatible level of microwave loss [8–
12]. There are also other ways of eliminating lift-off from
the conventional qubit junction process, such as the twostep angle-evaporation-free approach [13], which can also
be adapted to subtractive patterning compatible with
large-scale fabrication [14, 15].
The conventional pillar-junction approach to trilayerbased junctions [3, 4] results in a large volume of passivation material in the vicinity of the junction, and
the materials conventionally used for the passivation are
anodized niobium pentoxide [16] and deposited amorphous insulators with poor microwave loss tangent tan δ.
For example, typical silicon dioxide, SiO2, deposited by
plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition has a tan δ
no better than 10−3 at few-gigahertz frequencies, especially when deposited at low enough temperatures to
not damage aluminum oxide tunnel barriers [17]. This
implies that no reasonable superconducting qubits can
be fabricated with the conventional pillar-junction approach.
A more recent approach, the side-wall spacer
passivated sub-µm Josephson junction fabrication proarXiv:2504.03481v2  [quant-ph]  28 Nov 2025

===== Page 2 =====

2
cess (SWAPS) differs from the pillar-junction approach
in that the passivation layer is etched away almost completely and only remains on the sidewalls of the patterned
trilayer [18].
Similar junctions with anodized niobium
pentoxide on the sidewalls can also be created with anodization [16]. Nevertheless, because the remaining sliver
of passivation on the sidewalls is located at a point of high
electric field and is made of an amorphous insulator with
poor tan δ, the microwave loss introduced by the spacer
in the SWAPS and anodized solutions is still too large
to build state-of-the-art superconducting qubits. The removal of spacer oxide from SWAPS junctions has been
demonstrated [12]. However, in our experience, it is difficult to remove the spacer oxide reliably without causing
undesirable degradation of the aluminum-based tunnel
barrier or the surrounding niobium parts. These potential side-effects tend to lead to poor critical-current control and excess microwave loss, in addition to a suspended
structure which may ultimately limit post-processability
and yield. Other trilayer-based approaches resulting in
suspended structures include junctions made from fully
epitaxial NbN/AlN/NbN trilayers, including demonstration of T1 ≈0.3–0.5 µs already in Ref. [8] and later 16 µs
in Ref. [10].
Therefore, for qubit-compatible trilayer-type junctions, the key challenge is to passivate the bottom metal
of the trilayer such that a top contact can be reliably
formed, while simultaneously minimizing the volume of
material with poor loss tangent in areas of high electric
field. More quantitatively, in order for the passivation
to not limit the overall qubit performance, the product
ppass. tan δ should be small in comparison to the inverse
of the effective qubit quality factor Q = 2πfqT1, where
ppass. is the participation ratio of the passivation, fq is
qubit frequency, and T1 is the energy relaxation time of
the qubit. For state-of-the-art superconducting qubits,
1/Q is of order 10−7 [19, 20]. For the SWAPS process
and typical transmon qubit parameters, ppass. is of order
10−4 or greater and tan δ is 10−2 or greater, and therefore
ppass. tan δ is limited to no better than 10−6.
In this work, we introduce a native-oxide-passivated
trilayer junction (NAPA junction) that can be fabricated reliably and in which the contribution of passivation to 1/Q is negligible under reasonable assumptions.
Specifically, we use a SWAPS-like structure based on
an Al-AlOx-Nb trilayer with native aluminum oxide as
the sidewall passivation, which remains intact thanks to
the introduction of an additional via into the structure.
The contribution of the passivation layer to ppass. tan δ is
small, as long as we assume that the loss-tangent of the
native-oxide passivation is not significantly worse than
that of the tunnel barrier. Recently, an approach with
a native aluminum oxide passivation layer has been used
to fabricate junctions patterned into an Al-AlOx-Al trilayer [21] that also use aluminum native oxide as passivation. However, NAPA junctions differ in crucial details of
how electrical contact is made between the counter electrode of the trilayer and the top wiring layer. In particular, thanks to an additional via described in more detail
below, the NAPA junction fabrication process avoids exposing the native-oxide sidewall passivation to ion milling
or other aggressive oxide removal steps during the fabrication process.
Using optically-patterned NAPA junctions with a lateral size of approximately 600 nm, we fabricate superconducting transmon qubits and demonstrate time-averaged
T1 time up to 30 µs, and average qubit quality factors of
0.5 million over several chips and wafers, with the best
devices achieving quality factors close to one million. We
also discuss the implications of these results to the question of the role of subgap leakage in qubits with Nb-based
tunnel junctions.
II.
JUNCTION STRUCTURE AND
FABRICATION
Figure 1(a) and (b) show the conceptual structure and
a cross-sectional transmission electron micrograph of a
typical NAPA junction.
Let us first describe the final
structure, before describing how it is fabricated: The
tunnel barrier of the junction is defined by a trilayer of
aluminum base electrode (Al-BE), aluminum oxide tunnel barrier and a niobium counter electrode (Nb-CE).
The trilayer lies directly on a high-resistivity silicon substrate, without silicon oxide or other lossy dielectric layers in between. The sidewalls of the patterned trilayer
are covered by a native-oxide spacer, which is a relatively low-loss dielectric and electrically insulates Al-BE
from the Nb wiring layer (Nb2). The aluminum bottom
electrode Al-BE acts as one of the leads for connecting
the junction to other circuit elements. The wiring layer
Nb2 acts as the second lead and consists of two sublayers (Nb2a, Nb2b), with a via etched through Nb2a and
partially into the counter electrode (Nb-CE), in order to
provide electrical contact from Nb2 to Nb-CE. The sublayers Nb2a and Nb2b are galvanically connected to each
other almost everywhere. Along the vertical sidewalls of
the junction a layer of native niobium oxide separates
Nb2a and Nb2b [Fig. 1(b), Fig. 2(c)] but that separation
serves no functional purpose.
The advantage of this additional complexity in forming Nb2 is that it is possible to avoid exposing the thin
native-oxide passivation of the sidewalls to oxide removal
steps, such as ion milling. More specifically, the main
steps of the fabrication process are: First, we deposit
the unpatterned trilayer on a high-resistivity silicon substrate, using a single tool and without breaking vacuum
between deposition of the constituent layers, except for
in-situ oxidization of the tunnel barrier at a controlled
oxygen pressure. Second, we pattern the trilayer using
optical lithography and reactive ion etching, after which
the native-oxide passivation grows on the patterned AlBE and Nb-CE, upon exposure to oxygen when the wafer
is removed from the loadlock of the etching tool.
We
make no effort to control the wafer temperature or the

===== Page 3 =====

3
200 nm
200 nm
Native Oxide
Tunnel Barrier
Nb2b
Nb2a
Nb-CE
Al-BE
AlOx
Native oxide
Al-BE
Al-BE
Nb-CE
Nb-CE
Nb2b
Nb-2b
Nb2a
Nb-2a
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
FIG. 1. (a) Schematic illustration of a NAPA junction and (b) false-colored cross-sectional transmission electron micrograph
of a typical fabricated NAPA junction along the dashed black line shown in panel (a). The aluminum base electrode (Al-BE,
orange), tunnel barrier (white dashed line) and niobium counter electrode (Nb-CE, light green) are insulated from the Nb
wiring layer (Nb2a and Nb2b) by a native oxide passivation layer (red dashed line). The via providing galvanic contact between
Nb2 and Nb-CE is on top of the junction.(c) False-color scanning electron micrograph of fabricated Xmon-type shunt capacitor
patterned into Nb2, capacitively coupled to a readout resonator (partially visible at the top). (d) Close-up of two NAPA
junctions in series, with a small island of Al-BE in between. (e) Further zoomed in close-up of the junction in panel (d).
the introduction of oxygen and humidity at that point,
which may impact the quality of the native oxide that
forms. There are no major hurdles to controlling these
aspects of the oxidization process in the future. Third,
we deposit Nb2a, without ion milling or other oxide removal steps. Therefore, Nb2a is not at this point electrically connected to the trilayer counter electrode Nb-CE.
Fourth, we optically pattern and reactively etch a via
through Nb2a and partially into the counter electrode
(Nb-CE). Once the wafer is removed from the etching
tool, a native oxide forms on the part of Nb-CE exposed
through the via, but is removed in the next step. Fifth,
we deposit Nb2b, this time with in-situ ion milling preceding the deposition to remove oxides from all exposed
surfaces. Thus, inside the via, we form a galvanic connection between Nb2b and Nb-CE, and also connect Nb2b
to Nb2a almost everywhere, without native niobium oxide in between. Finally, we optically pattern and etch
both Nb2 sublayers, and the remaining Nb-CE outside
the junction area, the same way as in the conventional
SWAPS process [3]. See Appendix A for more details on
fabrication.
The introduction of a via and splitting of the deposition of Nb2 into two sublayers allow avoiding oxide removal steps when the native-oxide passivated sidewalls
of the trilayer are exposed.
Instead, surface oxide removal using ion milling is delayed until the sidewalls of
the trilayer are protected by Nb2a. Similarly, depositing Nb2a first protects the silicon substrate surface from
ion milling. This is a key difference to the method described in Ref. [21]. In fact, no surfaces are ion milled
in our approach, except Nb surfaces that are later covered by another Nb layer. All other surfaces are exposed
to only reactive ion etching, which operates at lower ion
energies than physical ion milling due to its chemical nature. Consistent with this, quarter wave resonators on
the same wafers as the qubits reach internal quality factors above ca. half a million, as discussed later.
Figure 1(c) shows a false-colored scanning electron micrograph of NAPA junctions used in a transmon-like
qubit, with a large shunt capacitor in the Xmon geometry [22]. Panels (d) and (e) show detailed close-ups of
the junctions. The qubit is capacitively coupled by the
claw-shaped coplanar capacitor to a readout resonator

===== Page 4 =====

4
(partially visible towards the top). Here, we have used
two NAPA junctions in series, in contrast to conventional
transmons.
The double-junction design allows keeping
the material left in Al-BE small. It also enables the use
of the same material (the Nb2 wiring layer for the device
in Fig. 1) for both the X-shaped island electrode and the
ground electrode, without requiring large parasitic junctions to connect the qubit junction to the ground plane.
The circuit model for the double-junction qubit is discussed in the next section.
We utilize the native aluminum oxide, that forms on
the etched Al-BE sidewalls to passivate the bottom electrode and prevent leakage currents between the bottom electrode and top electrode.
An unavoidable native niobium oxide layer also grows on the Nb counterelectrode but is surrounded on both sides by galvanicallyconnected top electrode metal (Nb-CE and Nb2a). By
using native aluminum oxide as passivation, we expect to
construct higher-coherence-time superconducting qubits
than with other trilayer-type junctions, such as SWAPS
or pillar-type junctions. In more exact terms, p tan δ can
be reduced, despite the tendency of p to increase with
decreasing thickness of the sidewall passivation. In the
case of aluminum oxide, tan δ of approximately 2 × 10−6
has been reported [23–25].
We also argue that the native oxide of any material
suitable for forming high-quality tunnel barriers is likely
to work well as sidewall passivation, assuming that the
native oxide formation is controlled such that its microwave loss tangent is similar to that of the tunnel barrier.
Microwave losses in the tunnel barrier will then
dominate because the participation ratio of the sidewall
passivation is always smaller than that of the tunnel barrier, if lateral dimensions are larger than film thicknesses.
Quantitatively, we estimate a ratio of 4:1 between the
tunnel barrier capacitance and the sidewall passivation
capacitance, for our specific geometry. Given the thin
dielectric thicknesses and large aspect ratios, we can estimate the capacitances using parallel-plate capacitor approximations: εAlOx × (600 nm)2/1.5 nm for the tunnel
barrier and εAlOx × 2(600 nm)(100 nm)/2 nm for the
sidewall passivation, with εAlOx the dielectic constant of
aluminum oxide. In the future, the lateral dimensions are
likely to be scaled down but so is the thickness of Al-CE,
so the overall ratio of these capacitances is not likely to
change dramatically.
III.
JUNCTION CHARACTERIZATION
To characterize the fabricated junctions in more detail, we perform energy dispersive spectroscopy analysis (EDS) on the junction cross-section shown in Fig. 1.
Fig. 2(a) shows a TEM image along with EDS maps of
the Nb, Al and O content. The native oxide layers are
visible as layers with bright contrast in the O map and
dark contrast in the Nb map.
The native Al oxide is
visible between Al-BE and Nb2a. In contrast, native ox-
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Al
O
Nb
Al-BE
Nb-CE
Nb2b
Nb2b
Nb2a
1
100 nm
100 nm
FIG. 2.
(a)-(d) TEM image and EDS analysis spectra on
the junction cross-section shown in Fig. 1, with the relative
concentrations (b) aluminum, (c) niobium, and (d) oxygen.
Native oxide layers, indicated by red arrows, are visible as areas with light contrast in panels (a) and (d) and dark contrast
in panel (b). Note the absence of oxide between Nb-CE and
Nb2b on the left and between Nb2a and Nb2b on the right,
indicated by blue arrows, implying a galvanic contact.
(e)
The resistances of test junctions versus nominal junction size
d, along with a fit showing the expected scaling with junction
area (solid orange line). (f) Low-temperature current-voltage
characteristics of a test junction with d = 629 nm measured
at 40 mK, showing a supercurrent branch at zero voltage and
a sharp current rise at a voltage 1.6 mV indicated by arrows,
corresponding to the sum of the superconducting gaps of Nb
and Al, confirming the Josephson behaviour of NAPA junctions.
ides are removed between Nb-CE and Nb2b on top of
the junction, and between Nb2a and Nb2b in the part
of wiring layer laying directly on the substrate. In addition, vertical native Nb oxide is visible between Nb2a
and Nb2b in both the O and Nb maps, as expected due
to directionality of the argon milling before deposition
of Nb2b. The tunnel barrier between Al-BE and Nb-CE
is less than 2 nm thick and not clearly visible in these
images.
We also find that the microstructure of Al-BE near the
sidewalls differs significantly from the bulk, as indicated
by the bright contrast at the edge of Al-BE in Fig. 2(a),
and by the mix of aluminum and oxygen in panels (b)

===== Page 5 =====

5
and (d). This change of microstructure is likely caused
by the reactive ion etching step used to pattern the trilayer, or corrosion due to residual chlorine or fluorine left
over from the etching process. Due to these changes in
Al-BE sidewall microstructure, we cannot quantitatively
estimate the thickness of the passivation layer, and thus
we cannot meaningfully estimate the loss tangent of the
sidewall passivation alone, even though qubit lifetimes
allow us to give an upper bound for the losses caused by
the junction as a whole. We also note that the oxygen
concentration in the Nb layers is visibly higher than the
oxygen content in Al.
We fabricate square test junctions with nominal lateral dimension d between 500 nm and 5 µm and measure their resistance at room temperature with an automated wafer prober in a four-probe configuration. Details of wafers are provided in Appendix E. The measured resistance R, shown for a test chip on wafer A in
Fig. 2(e), scales as expected with the junction area as
R = RA/(d −l)2, where RA = 1100 Ωµm2 is the mean
resistance-area product across the wafer and l = 90 nm
describes the reduction of the effective junction dimension from the nominal value on the photomasks. Direct
proportionality of the junction conductance with the effective junction area confirms that the measured conductance arises from the tunnel barrier itself, and not from
leakage through the sidewalls.
For nominally identical
junctions with a design diameter of 600 nm on wafer A,
SEM measurements on 50 junctions distributed over the
wafer give d = 600 ± 20 nm (1σ). The corresponding
normal state RA = 1100 ± 100 Ωµm2. The room temperature junction resistance varies by ±5% (±10% full
range) across the wafer, consistent with the observed dimensional spread due to lithography.
In Fig. 2(f), we show low-temperature current-voltage
(IV) characteristics of a single test junction with d =
629 nm and normal-state resistance of 10 kΩfrom wafer
B, measured in a dilution refrigerator at 40 mK. We observe a supercurrent branch at zero voltage with a switching current of 30 nA, and a sharp rise in current at a
voltage bias of (∆Nb + ∆Al)/e =1.6 mV, where e is the
electron charge and ∆Nb (∆Al) is the superconducting
gap in the niobium (aluminum) layer.
These findings
confirm that the device operates as a Josephson junction
between Al and Nb. We discuss the subgap IV characteristics and their relation to qubit coherence below and
in Appendix F.
IV.
QUBITS WITH NAPA JUNCTIONS
In this work, we mainly study transmon-like qubits
with two Josephson junctions in series, which allows us to
avoid large parasitic junctions without introducing additional processing steps. For comparison, we also fabricate
conventional fixed-frequency transmons, where large parasitic junctions are required to connect the small-criticalcurrent transmon junction to the ground plane, since we
wish to pattern both electrodes of the qubit shunt capacitor into the same metal layer.
Due to our relatively large 10 fF junction capacitance,
the two-junction qubits have extremely low charge sensitivity of only a few hertz (see Appendix B), despite
having a small (<∼2 µm) superconducting island between
the junctions. The lowest-energy excitations of this qubit
type are transmon-like, with energy oscillating between
the main shunt capacitor CS and the effective inductor formed by the two junctions in series. We estimate
CS ≈100 fF using electrostatic simulations. In the hypothetical case of small junction capacitances ∼1 fF, typical for Al–AlOx–Al junctions with lateral dimensions on
the order of 100 nm, the charging energy of the island
would be high and the two junctions would form a single
Cooper pair transistor [26], making the effective inductance highly dependent on offset charge. Even in that
case, however, coplanar shunt capacitance could be added
to restore excellent charge insensitivity.
We also fabricate devices where the roles of Al-BE and
Nb2 in the design are inverted (”Al qubits”): That is, the
qubit shunt capacitor, ground plane and resonators are
patterened into Al-BE, while the small island between
two junctions is Nb. We emphasize that this is a layout difference in the lithographic patterns only, and does
not imply any changes in the processing steps. The individual junctions themselves and their native aluminum
oxide passivation in particular remain nominally identical
for the ”Al qubits” and the ”Nb qubits”, except for uncorrelated minor fabrication differences between wafers
(Appendix E). Regardless of qubit type, each qubit is
capacitively coupled to a λ/4 coplanar waveguide readout resonator with resonant frequency between 6 GHz
and 7 GHz. Each chip contains three to seven individual qubits, with readout resonators inductively coupled
to a common feedline for frequency-multiplexed readout
and qubit drive. Appendix E gives more details on the
characterized devices and wafers.
We characterize qubits using standard pulse sequences
in a dilution refrigerator setup at 10 mK (see Appendix D
for details). In Fig. 3, we show one of the best lifetime
measurements, for a double-junction Nb qubit with nominal junction size d = (600 nm)2 and qubit frequency
equal to 5.17 GHz. The decay as a function of delay between excitation and readout is exponential with a time
constant T1 = 36 µs. Figures 3(b) and (c) show results of
Ramsey and Hahn echo experiments, respectively, which
are well described by exponentially decaying sinusoids
with time constants T ∗
2 = 17 µs and T2,echo = 42 µs,
respectively. The y-axis, ranging from 0 to 1, approximately represents the excited-state population of the
qubit but is not precisely calibrated. When monitored
repeatedly over several hours, we find that T1, T ∗
2 , and
T2,echo fluctuate in time, as shown in Fig. 3(d).
The
fluctuations are qualitatively similar to those commonly
observed in angle-evaporated aluminum qubits [27–29].
The time-averaged T1 = 30 µs corresponds to a qubit
quality factor Q = 2πfT1 of one million.

===== Page 6 =====

6
R
D
F
H
fef
fgf /2
fge
R
R
R
FIG. 3. (a) Decay of a qubit at frequency fge = 5.17 GHz
from the excited state, measured data (points) fit to exponential decay with T1 = 36 µs (solid line), corresponding to
a qubit quality factor Q = 2πfT1 ≈1 million. (b) Ramsey
and (c) Hahn echo experiments fit to a decaying sinusoid and
exponential decay, respectively. (d) T1, T ∗
2 , T2,echo fluctuate
over time when monitored for several hours.
(e) Two-tone
spectroscopy experiment, with qubit transitions at frequencies fge, fef and fgf/2 indicated by arrows. We extract an
anharmonicity of −56 MHz.
Figure 3(e) shows the qubit level structure probed by
microwave spectroscopy. At low drive powers, we observe
a response at fge = 5.17 GHz corresponding to the transition from the ground to the excited state. When increasing the drive power, we see two further peaks appear, corresponding to the transition between the first and second
excited states at fef = 5.114 GHz and the two-photon
transition from the ground to the second excited state
at fgf/2 = 5.142 GHz. This confirms the transmon-like
level structure of our double-junction qubit, with an extracted anharmonicity of −56 MHz.
The anharmonicity is approximately four times smaller than that of a
conventional single-junction transmon with the same frequency and the same 100 fF shunt capacitance.
This
is consistent with the intuition that the excitations remain transmon-like but now the phase drop is split over
two junctions.
Numerical simulations in Appendix B
confirm that the measured anharmonicity is consistent
with CS = 100 fF and junction capacitance on the order
of 10 fF. Ten femtofarads in turn matches the capacitance expected for a junction with an effective area of
(600 nm −90 nm)2, with specific capacitance of roughly
40 fF/µm2 corresponding to a very low-transparency aluminum oxide tunnel barrier [25, 30]. In the appendix, we
also numerically investigate another compromise between
anharmonicity and charge dispersion and find that an anharmonicity of -102 MHz with charge dispersion of 4 kHz
Nb qubit
Al qubit
(a)
(b)
FIG. 4. (a) Time-averaged qubit quality factors Q. Qubits
with ground planes and the qubit island (filled markers) patterned into Nb2 produce on average Q ∼0.5 million, while
qubits with Al-BE (open markers) produce an average Q of 0.2
million. Symbols indicate devices from different wafers.Inset
shows two types of qubit variants with shunt capacitor and
ground places patterned into Nb2 (top) or Al-BE (bottom).
(b) Qubit frequency versus nominal junctions size d. Dashed
gray lines are guides to the eye.
is possible, while keeping the qubit frequency similar.
Figure 4(a) shows time-averaged qubit quality factors
of double-junction NAPA qubits from several chips on
multiple wafers. The wafers have different tunnel barrier
oxidation parameters (see Appendix E) and the nominal
junction sizes range from 600 nm to 720 nm. Qubits with
larger junctions are excluded because they have frequencies close to their readout resonators, and are thus limited
by Purcell decay. On devices with qubit capacitors and
ground planes patterned into Nb, we find relatively few
outliers and an average quality factor of 0.5 million, with
the best measured devices having a quality factor close
to one million.
Quality factors of Nb qubits show no
correlation to junction size d (see Fig. 8 in Appendix C).
Al qubits, with capacitors patterned into Al and the
small island between the two junctions made of Nb, on
the other hand show a noticeably worse average quality factor of 0.2 million. Furthermore, there appears to
be a trend in qubit lifetime decreasing rapidly as nominal junction size decreases below 650 nm (Fig. 8 in Appendix C), although the range of junction sizes and the
number of data points are too small for a definite con-

===== Page 7 =====

7
clusion.
We have also measured single-junction qubits
with equivalent nominal junction sizes from 600 nm to 1
µm, where we achieve quality factors of 0.3 million for
the best device and an average Q of 0.2 million, again
with no clear dependence on junction size (Appendix C).
The single-junction qubits have a large parasitic series
junction, with dimensions 6.4 µm × 3 µm, connecting
the Josephson junction to the ground plane, which may
limit qubit lifetimes [31].
The lack of increased microwave loss with increased
junction size would at first suggest that our qubit coherence is not limited by the tunnel junction itself or
the spacer material, whose volume scales with the linear
junction dimension. One would instead hypothesize that
microwave losses in capacitors patterned into Al-BE are
higher than in capacitors patterned into Nb2. However,
we find similar low-power microwave loss in λ/4 coplanar
waveguide resonators when comparing resonators patterned into Nb2 and Al-BE. We measure such reference
resonators on separate test chips from wafers A and C. In
the low-photon-number limit, the internal quality factors
are approximately 0.5 to 0.8 million regardless of layer,
for resonators with 20 µm (10 µm) center pin (gap) width
(Appendix C).
Fig. 4(b) shows that qubit frequencies within a single
chip scale approximately linearly with the nominal junction dimension, as expected, with the frequencies mostly
falling within ±100 MHz of the linear trend. However, we
find additional variation of roughly ±500 MHz from chip
to chip, in particular in the data for wafer A that we have
most data for. We attribute this chip-to-chip scatter to
nonuniformity of our deposition and etching processes on
the full-wafer scale, as well as a strong local loading effect
during etching. The loading effect in reactive etching processes can lead to a large reduction in the etch rate when
a large amount of material is etched in a given location.
We see this loading effect most clearly in wafer B, where
we fabricate both Nb qubits and Al qubits on the same
wafer, with a checker pattern of 20 mm × 20 mm shots
that alternate between Nb qubits and Al qubits.
The
challenge with this checker pattern is that almost all aluminum is etched away in the first patterning step from
the Nb qubit shots, while almost no aluminum is etched
from the Al qubit shots. This implies that the etch rate
for the Al qubit shots is far higher than for the Nb qubit
shots, due to the loading effect. We believe this leads
to heavy overetching in the Al qubit shots and explains
why wafer B Al qubit frequencies in Fig. 4 are nearly a
factor of two lower than Nb qubit frequencies, and the
effective linewidth reduction indicated by the crossing of
the dashed gray line is roughly 450 nm for those data
points.
The loading effect could also lead to different amounts
of etch residues in the vicinity of the qubit junctions in
comparison to the reference resonators. This is one hypothesis for the difference in Nb and Al qubit performance despite similar reference resonator performance.
However, this is speculative and we have not been able
directly observe such residues. Despite lacking a satisfactory explanation for the dominant T1-limiting mechanism, if we assume pessimistically that all losses are
related to the junctions, we can give an upper bound of
order 10−5 for the effective loss tangent of the NAPA
junctions, based on 1/Q ∼10−6 and junction participation ratio pJ ≈CJ/2CS, which is approximately 5%
for the double-junction qubits. The factor of two in the
denominator is due to the junction capacitances being
in series, and can also be seen in the definition of the
effective shunt capacitance CΣ in Appendix B.
In dc measurements shown in Appendix F, we observe
a subgap leakage conductance of roughly 1/2.5 MΩ≈
4 × 10−3 × R−1
N
above critical temperature of Al, hinting
at possible subgap states present in the Nb electrode of
the tunnel junction. The appendix also shows that the
subgap conductance does not necessarily improve when
moving to millikelvin temperatures, although peaks of
subgap current only allow to estimate an upper bound
for the true leakage relevant to qubits from the dc data.
Resonances of the uncontrolled electromagnetic environment of our test junctions are the most plausible explanation for such peaks [32]. High subgap leakage is often
observed in Nb-based tunnel junctions, while Al-based
junctions can exhibit much lower values of leakage current [33]. In Ref. [34], dc measurements of much more
transparent Al-Nb junctions, fabricated with the SWAPS
process, exhibit a much lower ratio of subgap leakage conductance to normal-state conductance. While the absolute leakage conductance demonstrated in Ref. [34] is not
lower, the lower ratio hints at the possibility of obtaining
even lower leakage currents for NAPA junctions in the
future.
At
first
sight,
a
parallel
real
conductance
of
1/2.5 MΩshould limit qubit quality factor to just
2.5 MΩ/Zc,trans. ∼104, where Zc,trans. ≈320 Ωis the
characteristic impedance of our transmon-like qubits.
However, the relevant energy scale for qubit T1 is
h(5 GHz) ≈20 µeV, which is only one tenth of the superconducting gap of Al. If Al-BE has a good superconducting gap with no subgap states, there are no states for
electrons in the possible subgap states of Nb2 to tunnel
into, and they cannot exchange energy with the qubit degree of freedom. In future experiments, this relationship
between qubit coherence and zero-bias conductance could
be studied in more detail by carefully designing the microwave environment of the dc test structures to suppress
resonances with the environment, while further theoretical work could provide quantitative predictions for the
relation between subgap states, quasiparticles and qubit
coherence [35–37].
V.
CONCLUSIONS
In conclusion, we introduced a method for creating native-oxide-passivated (NAPA) Josephson junctions
where the tunnel barrier is defined by an Al-AlOx-Nb

===== Page 8 =====

8
trilayer and patterning is done subtractively, without at
any point exposing the sidewall passivation to aggressive oxide removal steps.
We demonstrated hallmarks
of Josephson junction behavior in both dc characteristics and by showing that qubits utilizing NAPA junctions
have transmon-like level structure. For our best qubits,
we find quality factors up to one million, slightly above
the best reported for trilayer-type qubits, or any qubit
utilizing Nb as a junction material.
The limiting factor for qubit quality factor is not clear based on these
proof-of-principle results, but it is likely that improved
coherence times can be achieved in the future by optimizing the etch recipes, by creating the shunt capacitors
in separate processing steps, or by reducing junction dimensions. To further elucidate the origin of decoherence,
Ramsey noise spectroscopy [38] could be employed to
disentangle low frequency noise from the high frequency
dielectric loss inferred from T1. Furthermore, since the
processing steps for NAPA junctions are compatible with
modern fabrication tools and processes, we believe that
frequency targeting can be dramatically improved in the
future by following standard industry practices. Therefore, our results pave the way forward toward manufacturing superconducting qubits at scale. Finally, NAPA
junctions may also offer an interesting platform for future studies of the impact of extreme gap asymmetry on
quasiparticle tunneling.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We acknowledge Tuomo Honkaharju and Jarmo Roine
for technical help in the sample fabrication in VTT and
OtaNano Micronova cleanroom facilities, and Harri Pohjonen and Isabel Gueissaz-Mattelm¨aki for technical assistance. We also thank Tero Heikkil¨a for valuable discussions.
The research was funded by the European
Union’s Horizon RIA, EIC and ECSEL programmes under Grants No. 824109 European Microkelvin Platform
(EMP), No. 101113086 SoCool, No. 101007322 MatQu,
No. 899558 aCryComm and No. 101113983 Qu-Pilot.
We also acknowledge financial support of Research Council of Finland through projects No. 322580 ETHEC, No.
356542 SUPSI, the QTF Centre of Excellence project No.
336817, and Business Finland through Quantum Technologies Industrial (QuTI) No. 128291 and Technology
Industries of Finland Centennial Foundation and Chips
JU project Arctic No. 101139908.
Appendix A: Fabrication details
The fabrication proceeds as follows: First, we deposit
the Al-AlOx-Nb trilayer by dc magnetron sputtering on
a 150 mm high-resistivity silicon wafer, with a thickness
of 100 nm for the bottom Al electrode and 100 nm for
the Nb counter electrode. The aluminum oxide tunnel
barrier is formed in situ by exposing the bottom aluminum electrode to 30 to 150 Torr of pure oxygen for 15
to 30 minutes, depending on the wafer. Relative to typical Manhattan-style qubit junctions, the oxygen pressure
is high because of the large junction size and the larger
superconducting gap of the niobium counter electrode.
Next, we pattern the trilayer using optical lithography
and fluorine-based reactive ion etching (RIE) to etch NbCE followed by chlorine-based RIE to etch Al-BE, timed
such that overetch into silicon remains small (∼20 nm).
A native oxide forms on the etched sidewalls of both AlBE and Nb-CE upon exposure to ambient conditions.
After resist removal, we sputter Nb2a, without any oxide removal steps. We then spin photoresist and optically pattern a 200 nm × 500 nm mask opening on top
of the junction and use fluorine-based RIE to create a
via that goes through Nb2a and penetrates partially into
Nb-CE. Preceding sputtering of Nb2b, we use in-situ Arbased ion milling to remove the native oxides from Nb2a
and the part of Nb-CE exposed through the via.
Finally, we use optical lithography to pattern the top electrode and etch through Nb2b, Nb2a and Nb-CE using
fluorine-based RIE, following the same approach as in
conventional SWAPS junction fabrication [3]. This last
(fluorine based) etch is selective to Al-BE due to the formation of non-volatile AlF3, thus effectively stopping at
Al-BE. However, it is not selective between niobium and
silicon, and thus etches into the substrate by a significant
amount (∼120 nm) in areas not covered by Al-BE. All
structures are patterned optically using an i-line stepper,
and thus we limit the minimum nominal junction size to
500 nm × 500 nm. There is, however, no great barrier
to going to smaller junction sizes in the future, with either more advanced optical lithography or electron beam
lithography.
Appendix B: Double-junction qubit
Figure 5 shows an electrical circuit representation of
the double-junction qubits studied here. Mathematically,
it is convenient to define the island between the two junctions as having (ϕ = 0) and define ϕ± = (ϕ2 ± ϕ1)/2,
where ϕ1 (ϕ2) is the phase drop across the junction from
the small island to the lower (upper) node. Under the
simplifying assumption of identical junctions, one can
then show that the Hamiltonian is
H = e2
2CΣ
(n−−ng,−)2 +
e2
2C∆
(n+ −ng,+)2
−2EJ,1 cos(2πϕ+
ϕ0
) cos(2πϕ−
ϕ0
),
(B1)
where ϕ0 = 2e/h, C∆= CJ,1 + CJ,2 + Cg,1 + Cg,2,
CΣ = 4CS + C∆, n± = n2 ± n1 are Cooper pair number operators, and ng,± parametrize offset charges arising from Vg,1 and Vg,2. We have chosen to use CΣ for
the capacitance associated with the difference operator,

===== Page 9 =====

9
because we wish to highlight the similarity of ϕ−excitations to those of a conventional transmon qubit, where
the same symbol is commonly used to parametrize the
effective shunt capacitance.
ϕ=0
ϕ2
Cg,2
Vg,2
Cg,1
Vg,1
EJ,1
CJ,1
EJ,2
CJ,2
ϕ1
CS
FIG. 5. Electrical circuit representation of a double-junction
qubit.
There are multiple ways to view this circuit: a transmon qubit with the junction replaced by a single Cooper
pair transistor, two frequency-degenerate fixed-frequency
transmons ultrastrongly coupled to each other by CS, a
flux qubit in the limit of vanishing small-junction critical
current but large shunt capacitance, or a quantronium
circut in the limit of a vanishingly small inductive shunt
element [39]. Note that neither ϕ+ nor ϕ−can be considered to be effectively classical for the parameters relevant
here. Rather, the first excited states correspond to excitations along ϕ−for the experimental parameters here,
but already the fifth excited state corresponds to an excitation along ϕ+, as shown below.
Numerically, it is straightforward to simulate the circuit, directly in the basis of ϕ1 and ϕ2, using the flux
qubit circuit model built into the scQubits Python package [40, 41], with the small junction Josephson energy
set to a vanishingly small value. Below, we express capacitances in femtofarads and convert them in the simulations to charging energies by dividing e2/2 by the capacitance in question.
Figure 6 shows the wavefunctions of the first eigenstates and lists their energies, for the experimentally
relevant parameters.
The simulated anharmonicity is
−54 MHz for a qubit frequency of 5.165 GHz, in line
with the measured anharmonicity of −56 MHz for the
5.17 GHz qubit discussed in the main text.
The numerical simulations show that the doublejunction qubits studied here are extremely charge insensitive, with the first transition frequency having a variation of only 2 Hz over ng,±. This extreme charge insensitivity can be understood by observing that the lowest
energy states in Fig. 6 correspond to the transmon-like
ϕ−excitations and comparing the Hamiltonian to that
of a standard transmon [42] with Josephson energy EJ
and charging energy EC.
Under the heavily-simplified
approximation ϕ+ ≈0, the Hamiltonian here looks like
that of a conventional transmon but with 2EJ,1 in place
of EJ and approximately (e2/2CS)/4 in place of EC. Note
the factor of four in the effective charging energy, aris2.5
0.0
2.5
 (rad)
(a)
(b)
(c)
2.5 0.0
2.5
 (rad)
2.5
0.0
2.5
 (rad)
(d)
2.5 0.0
2.5
 (rad)
(e)
2.5 0.0
2.5
 (rad)
(f)
FIG. 6.
Wavefunctions of the six lowest eigenstates of the
double-junction qubit circuit in Fig. 5, with CS = 100 fF,
CJ,1 = CJ,2 = 10 fF, EJ,1 = EJ,2 = 40 GHz × h and zero
gate charges. Here, φi = 2πϕj/ϕ0. The intensity of the green
color corresponds to the wavefunction squared, in arbitrary
units. The transition frequencies, from the ground state, are
(b) 5.165 GHz, (c) 10.276 GHz, (d) 15.331 GHz, (e) 20.331
GHz, (f) 23.436 GHz.
ing from the additional factor of four in the definition
of CΣ ≈4CS for the double-junction qubit. In order to
maintain comparable qubit frequency for the same CS,
2EJ,1 must therefore be chosen as 4EJ. The simulated
qubit frequency of 5.15 GHz is indeed relatively close to
p
8(2EJ,1)(e2/2CS)/4 ≈5.57 GHz, as you would expect
for a transmon. The low charging energy explains the
low anharmonicity, but also note that the ratio of the effective Josephson energy 2EJ,1 = 4EJ to charging energy
(e2/2CS)/4 = EC/4 is sixteen times larger than EJ/EC
of the conventional transmon, with the same CS and comparable frequency. This explains the extremely low value
of simulated charge sensitivity.
Unfortunately, approximating ϕ+ as zero is too simplistic and in reality sensitivity to ng,+ dominates charge
dispersion.
Nevertheless, we can partially recover anharmonicity by sacrificing some charge insensitivity. In
particular, if we decrease CS, EJ,1 and EJ,2 by 45%, we
achieve an anharmonicity of -102 MHz and a charge dispersion of 4 kHz, with the qubit frequency changing only
little to 4.94 GHz. For these parameters, it is the fourth,
rather than the fifth, excited state at 16.957 GHz that
corresponds to the first ϕ+ excitation.
Appendix C: Additional data
Figure 7 shows the measured internal quality factors
of λ/4 coplanar waveguide resonators patterned in AlBE or Nb2, measured on separate test chips on wafers
A and C (wafer details are in Appendix E). The test
chips have eight resonators with frequencies between 4.5
GHz and 7.7 GHz coupled to a common feedline. The
CPW center trace has a width of 20 µm and the gap
between the center trace and the ground plane is 10

===== Page 10 =====

10
10
0
10
2
10
4
10
6
Photon number
10
5
10
6
10
7
Internal quality factor
(a)
Nb resonators
Wafer A
10
0
10
2
10
4
10
6
Photon number
10
5
10
6
10
7 (b)
Al resonators
Wafer C
FIG. 7. Resonator internal quality factors as functions of circulating photon number for (a) resonators patterned into Nb2
on wafer A and (b) into Al-BE on wafer C. Markers indicate
resonators with different frequencies on the same chip.
µm. For the Nb resonators, both the low-power internal quality factors and their photon-number dependence
are typical of Nb resonators, as you can see by comparing Fig. 7(a) to, e.g., the planar Nb reference shown in
Fig. 2(a) of Ref. [43], which also shows internal quality
factor of four million at 106 photons, for the same CPW
gap and width. It is perhaps even surprising that the resonators patterned into Nb2 perform so well, even though
both the substrate-metal and the substrate-air interfaces
have seen significant additional processing due to deposition and removal of a trilayer, before Nb2 deposition
and its patterning. The Al resonators show similar low
power quality factors but much weaker power dependence
and considerable scatter in the power-independent highpower quality-factor. It is typical for Al resonators for
the high-power quality factor to saturate to lower values
than for Nb resonators (e.g. 3 million in Ref. [44], but
the scatter suggests that there is room to improve and is,
qualitatively, in line with the hypothesis of non-uniform
etch residues. Nevertheless, the high low-power internal
quality factors (≥0.4 million) do not straightforwardly
explain the observed T1 times.
In Figure 8, we plot measured quality factors versus
nominal Josephson junction size d. The data points in
panel (a) are the same as in Fig. 4, except for the horizontal axis. The qubit frequencies for the single-junction
transmons in panel (b) range from 4 GHz to 9 GHz, which
means that some qubits have their frequency above the
corresponding readout resonator. The devices with nominal dimension above 0.9 µm are flux-tunable transmons
with two junctions in parallel forming a SQUID loop, and
the given dimension is the size of an effective single junction with the same nominal area. The flux-tunable transmons were characterized at nominally zero flux threading
the SQUID loop. We find average qubit Q of 0.3 million
(a)
(b)
FIG. 8. Qubit quality factors of (a) double-junction qubits
and (b) single-junction transmons, as functions of nominal
Josephson junction size d. Green (orange) markers indicate
devices with qubit electrodes patterned into Nb2 (Al-BE).
Different symbols correspond to different wafers.
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
20
40
T *
2  (µs)
(a)
Nb, wafer A
Nb, wafer B
Al, wafer B
Al, wafer C
2
3
4
5
6
7
Qubit frequency (GHz)
0
20
40
T2, echo (µs)
(b)
FIG. 9. (a) Ramsey decoherence time T ∗
2 and (b) Hahn echo
decoherence times T2,echo for the devices shown in Fig. 4 of
the main text. Filled markers indicate devices with qubit electrodes in the Nb2 layer and open markers in Al-BE. Symbols
indicate devices from different wafers.
for single-junction Nb qubits and 0.2 million for singlejunction Al qubits, with no clear dependence on d in case
of Nb qubits. Al qubits on the other hand show a trend
of decreasing quality factor with decreasing d below 650
nm, more clearly so in case of wafer B and less clearly in
case of wafer C.
In Figure 9, we show the time-averaged T2 times of the
same devices for which qubit quality factors are shown in
Fig. 4 in the main text. We find T ∗
2 up to 25 µs and T2,echo
up to nearly 40 µs, with T2,echo typically higher than T ∗
2
by up to a factor of two. Note that the T2 times were

===== Page 11 =====

11
not characterized for all devices. The somewhat lower
T2 times observed in Al qubits are most likely explained
by their lower T1 compared to Nb qubits, although we
believe that the T2 times in general may be limited by
the measurement setup.
Appendix D: Measurement setup
We measure qubits in a dilution refrigerator setup similar to that used in Ref. [43]. The input line, used for both
qubit drive and readout pulses, is attenuated by nominally 61 dB distributed among the different temperature
stages, and filtered with low-pass filters and infrared filters at the base temperature stage.
The qubit chips
are wire-bonded to gold-plated copper sample holders,
mounted inside magnetic shields. We use a a pair of microwave switches at the base temperature stage to allow
for characterizing up to five chips in a single cooldown.
There are minor changes in the filtering configuration
between cooldowns, but we have not observed significant
changes in qubit performance. The output signal is amplified by a traveling-wave parametric amplifier at base
temperature and a high-electron-mobility transistor at 4
K, followed by further amplification at room temperature. At room temperature, we use a Zurich Instruments
SHFQC for generating the readout and drive pulses and
digitizing the readout signals.
Appendix E: Devices and wafers
We have characterized devices from five different
wafers, A, B, C, D, and E. The main difference between
the processing is the tunnel barrier oxidation parameters:
Most wafers were oxidized for 15 minutes at 30 Torr,
while wafer D was oxidized for 30 minutes at 150 Torr.
The SEM and TEM images shown in Figures 1 and 2
are taken from wafer A. The room temperature junction
resistance data in Fig. 2 is from wafer A, as is the qubit
device characterized in Figure 3. The low-temperature dc
measurements shown in Fig. 2 and Appendix F are from
wafer B. Wafers A and E have only Nb qubits, wafer C
has only Al qubits, and wafers B and D have both in the
checker pattern mentioned in the main text.
All characterized qubits have a simulated shunt capacitance of approximately 100 fF. The measured qubitreadout resonator couplings g/2π are between 50 MHz
and 90 MHz, while the coupling between the readout resonator and the feedline κ/2π varier from 100 kHz to 300
kHz. Most measured qubits use capacitors in the Xmon
geometry with 20 µm arm width and 20 µm gap between
the qubit island and the ground plane, although a few
devices have arm widths and gaps ranging from 10 µm to
80 µm. Our best-performing device, shown in Fig. 3 of
the main text, has a 10 µm arm width and gap. We have
not observed a consistent dependence between the Xmon
geometry and qubit performance.
The summary plots
shown in Fig. 4 of the main text as well as Appendix C
include all characterized fixed-frequency qubits.
To estimate the junction capacitance, we measure anharmonicities from single-junction qubits with different
nominal junction sizes, shown in Table I. For reference,
we also include a device with angle-evaporated Al-AlOxAl junctions and Nb electrodes, with the same Xmon geometry. We then find the charging energies EC matching
measured anharmonicities and qubit frequencies using
the scQubits package, calculate the corresponding total
capacitance, and subtract the simulated external shunt
capacitance to obtain the capacitance contributed by the
junction. The contribution of the junction capacitance
in the Al-AlOx-Al reference qubit is near-negligible. We
find junction capacitances of 7 fF for a nominally 612 nm
wide junction (22 fF for 800 nm wide junctions). These
values are consistent with an expected capacitance per
area of roughly 40 fF/µm2, considering that devices from
different wafers likely have different true junction areas
for a given nominal size due to variations in lithography and etching. For the simulations of double-junction
qubits described in Appendix B, we use 10 fF as an estimate for the typical capacitance per junction in measured
devices.
Appendix F: Low-temperature dc measurements
We performed low-temperature dc measurements on
separate test structures from wafer B. The devices are
mounted at the mixing chamber stage of a dry dilution
refrigerator equipped with radiation shielding and filtering [33, 45]. We apply a voltage bias at room temperature
and measure both the current and voltage across the device in a four-probe configuration with room-temperature
transimpedance and voltage amplifiers.
The measurement lines have a resistance of approximately 2 kΩper
line.
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIG. 10. (a) Current-voltage characteristics of a test junction
at 1.3 K (markers), as well theory prediction for a normal–
insulator–superconductor junction (dashed orange line). (b)
Zoom of the data shown in panel (a), along with a linear slope
with Rsubgap = 2.5 MΩ(solid green line). (c) Data measured
at 40 mK (markers) with the same voltage range as in panel
(b), with the same linear slope (solid green line) as a guide to
the eye.

===== Page 12 =====

12
TABLE I. Measured qubit frequencies, anharmonicities and extracted junction capacitances for single-junction transmon qubits
with different junction sizes but similar Xmon geometry. The T1 coherence data is time-averaged over 4-8 hours.
Nominal junction
size (µm)
Wafer
Qubit
frequency
(GHz)
T1 (µs)
Anharmonicity
(MHz)
EC/h (MHz)
Junction
capacitance (fF)
0.8
D
4.389
12.6
-176
162
22
0.612
E
4.848
15.2
-208
185
7
0.2
Al-AlOx-Al
reference
4.294
140
-220
196
1
In Figure 10(a), we show measured current-voltage
characteristics of a junction with nominal d = 629 nm
at 1.3 K, where the Al bottom electrode is in the normal state. We find approximately zero current up to a
voltage of approximately 1.4 mV, as expected for tunneling in a normal–insulator–superconductor (NIS) junction [46]. On this scale, we find good agreement with
simulations with normal-state resistance RN =10 kΩ,
measured at 10 K, and niobium superconducting gap
∆Nb = 1.42 mV, extracted as shown below. On a smaller
scale [Fig. 10(b)], however, we find a linear-in-V subgap
slope corresponding to a resistance Rsubgap = 2.5 MΩ,
with a far larger conductance than expected from thermal excitations alone.
The subgap current in a NIS
junction is often characterized with the phenomenological Dynes parameter γ [47], and here we can estimate
γ = RN/Rsubgap = 4 × 10−3.
At 40 mK [Fig. 10(c)], we observe a supercurrent
branch, as shown in Fig. 2(f) of the main text, features
corresponding to the sum and difference of the superconducting gaps of Nb and Al (shown in Fig. 11), as well
as additional subgap structure. Outside the supercurrent
branch, the IV is not hysteretic. The features at |V | < 0.5
mV are likely due to resonances in the microwave environment of the junction [32], impeding characterization
of the subgap in the region |V | < ∆Al/e = 0.2 mV relevant for qubit operation. We observe qualitatively similar
behavior in another device with d = 629 nm and RN = 20
kΩ, finding Rsubgap = 3.5 MΩat 1.3 K, corresponding to
γ = 6 × 10−3.
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)
FIG. 11. (a) Measured current-voltage characteristics and for
the same test junction as in Fig. 10 at several temperatures.
(b) Numerical differential conductance calculated from the
data in panel (a), with arrows indicating peaks occurring at
|V | = ∆Nb ± ∆Al.
(c) Extracted superconducting gaps of
niobium ∆Nb and (d) aluminum versus the bath temperature.

===== Page 13 =====

13
To extract the superconducting gaps of Nb and Al,
∆Nb and ∆Al, respectively, we numerically calculate the
differential conductance dI/dV from the measured current I and voltage V and extract the voltage at which
peaks occur in the differential conductance, as shown
in Fig. 11(a–b).
We identify the peaks occurring at
|V | > 1.4 mV as corresponding to (∆Nb + ∆Al)/e and
those at 1.0 mV< |V | < 1.4 mV as corresponding to
(∆Nb −∆Al)/e. The peaks at (∆Nb −∆Al)/e arise from
aligning the energy levels of thermally excited quasiparticles in Al with the gap edge of Nb [48]. We average the
peak positions found at positive and negative voltages
for a given bath temperature and extract the gaps versus
bath temperature, as shown in Fig. 11(c–d). Below 0.4
K, the peaks at ∆Nb−∆Al are no longer visible due to the
small number of quasiparticles in Al. However, we can
still extract the peaks at ∆Nb + ∆Al and extract ∆Al by
assuming that ∆Nb stays constant at low temperatures.
We find ∆Nb ≈1.4 mV for both devices. For aluminum,
we find ∆Al = 200 µeV at the lowest measured temperatures, with little variation below 0.5 K.
[1] G. J. Dolan, Applied Physics Letters 31, 337 (1977).
[2] A. Potts, P. R. Routley, G. J. Parker, J. J. Baumberg,
and P. A. J. De Groot, Journal of Materials Science: Materials in Electronics 12, 289 (2001).
[3] L. Gronberg, J. Hassel, P. Helisto, and M. Ylilammi,
IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity 17,
952 (2007).
[4] S. K. Tolpygo, V. Bolkhovsky, R. Rastogi, S. Zarr, A. L.
Day, E. Golden, T. J. Weir, A. Wynn, and L. M. Johnson,
IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity 29, 1
(2019).
[5] M. Dorojevets, C. L. Ayala, N. Yoshikawa, and A. Fujimaki, IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity
23, 1700605 (2013).
[6] J. M. Kreikebaum, K. P. O’Brien, A. Morvan, and I. Siddiqi, Superconductor Science and Technology 33, 06LT02
(2020).
[7] N.
Muthusubramanian,
M.
Finkel,
P.
Duivestein,
C. Zachariadis, S. L. M. van der Meer, H. M. Veen, M. W.
Beekman, T. Stavenga, A. Bruno, and L. DiCarlo, Quantum Science and Technology 9, 025006 (2024).
[8] Y. Nakamura, H. Terai, K. Inomata, T. Yamamoto,
W. Qiu, and Z. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett. 99, 212502
(2011).
[9] M. Weides, R. C. Bialczak, M. Lenander, E. Lucero,
M. Mariantoni, M. Neeley, A. D. O’Connell, D. Sank,
H. Wang, J. Wenner, T. Yamamoto, Y. Yin, A. N. Cleland, and J. Martinis, Superconductor Science and Technology 24, 055005 (2011).
[10] S. Kim, H. Terai, T. Yamashita, W. Qiu, T. Fuse,
F. Yoshihara, S. Ashhab, K. Inomata, and K. Semba,
Communications Materials 2, 98 (2021).
[11] D. Wan,
S. Couet,
X. Piao,
L. Souriau,
Y. Canvel, D. Tsvetanova, D. Vangoidsenhoven, A. Thiam,
A. Pacco, A. Potoˇcnik, M. Mongillo, T. Ivanov, J. Jussot, J. Verjauw, R. Acharya, F. Lazzarino, B. Govoreanu,
and I. P. Radu, Japanese Journal of Applied Physics 60,
SBBI04 (2021).
[12] A. Anferov, K.-H. Lee, F. Zhao, J. Simon, and D. I.
Schuster, Physical Review Applied 21, 024047 (2024).
[13] X. Wu, J. L. Long, H. S. Ku, R. E. Lake, M. Bal,
and D. P. Pappas, Applied Physics Letters 111, 032602
(2017).
[14] A. Stehli, J. D. Brehm, T. Wolz, P. Baity, S. Danilin,
V. Seferai, H. Rotzinger, A. V. Ustinov, and M. Weides,
Applied Physics Letters 117, 124005 (2020).
[15] J. Van Damme, S. Massar, R. Acharya, T. Ivanov,
D. Perez Lozano, Y. Canvel, M. Demarets, D. Vangoidsenhoven, Y. Hermans, J. G. Lai, A. M. Vadiraj,
M. Mongillo, D. Wan, J. De Boeck, A. Potoˇcnik, and
K. De Greve, Nature 634, 74 (2024).
[16] R. Dolata, T. Weimann, H.-J. Scherer, and J. Niemeyer,
IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity 9, 3255
(1999).
[17] D. Li, J. Gao, J. E. Austermann, J. A. Beall, D. Becker,
H. Cho, A. E. Fox, N. Halverson, J. Henning, G. C.
Hilton, J. Hubmayr, K. D. Irwin, J. Van Lanen, J. Nibarger, and M. Niemack, IEEE Transactions on Applied
Superconductivity 23, 1501204 (2013).
[18] L. Gr¨onberg, M. Kiviranta, V. Vesterinen, J. Lehtinen, S. Simbierowicz, J. Luomahaara, M. Prunnila, and
J. Hassel, Superconductor Science and Technology 30,
125016 (2017).
[19] H. Deng, Z. Song, R. Gao, T. Xia, F. Bao, X. Jiang, H.-
S. Ku, Z. Li, X. Ma, J. Qin, H. Sun, C. Tang, T. Wang,
F. Wu, W. Yu, G. Zhang, X. Zhang, J. Zhou, X. Zhu,
Y. Shi, H.-H. Zhao, and C. Deng, Physical Review Applied 19, 024013 (2023).
[20] M.
Tuokkola,
Y.
Sunada,
H.
Kivij¨arvi,
J.
Albanese,
L. Gr¨onberg,
J.-P. Kaikkonen,
V. Vesterinen,
J.
Govenius,
and
M.
M¨ott¨onen,
Methods
to
achieve near-millisecond energy relaxation and dephasing times for a superconducting transmon qubit (2025),
arXiv:2407.18778 [quant-ph].
[21] S.
Mechold,
K.
Peiselt,
M.
Schmelz,
G.
Oelsner,
M. Ziegler, U. H¨ubner, J. Kunert, and R. Stolz, IEEE
Transactions on Applied Superconductivity 34, 1 (2024).
[22] R. Barends, J. Kelly, A. Megrant, D. Sank, E. Jeffrey, Y. Chen, Y. Yin, B. Chiaro, J. Mutus, C. Neill,
P. O’Malley, P. Roushan, J. Wenner, T. C. White, A. N.
Cleland, and J. M. Martinis, Physical Review Letters
111, 080502 (2013).
[23] K. Sliwa, A. Melville, W. Woods, K. Serniak, T. Hazard,
E. Golden, D. Kim, B. Niedzielski, M. Gingras, K. Peng,
K. O’Brien, J. Yoder, M. Schwartz, and W. Oliver, 2023,
S73.014 (2023), conference Name: APS March Meeting
Abstracts, ADS Bibcode: 2023APS..MARS73014S.
[24] C. E. Murray, Materials Science and Engineering: R: Reports 146, 100646 (2021).
[25] H. J. Mamin, E. Huang, S. Carnevale, C. T. Rettner,
N. Arellano, M. H. Sherwood, C. Kurter, B. Trimm,
M. Sandberg, R. M. Shelby, M. A. Mueed, B. A. Madon,
A. Pushp, M. Steffen, and D. Rugar, Physical Review
Applied 16, 024023 (2021).

===== Page 14 =====

14
[26] J. A. Schreier, A. A. Houck, J. Koch, D. I. Schuster,
B. R. Johnson, J. M. Chow, J. M. Gambetta, J. Majer, L. Frunzio, M. H. Devoret, S. M. Girvin, and R. J.
Schoelkopf, Physical Review B 77, 180502 (2008).
[27] D. J. Van Harlingen, T. L. Robertson, B. L. T. Plourde,
P. A. Reichardt, T. A. Crane, and J. Clarke, Physical
Review B 70, 064517 (2004).
[28] P. V. Klimov, J. Kelly, Z. Chen, M. Neeley, A. Megrant,
B. Burkett, R. Barends, K. Arya, B. Chiaro, Y. Chen,
A.
Dunsworth,
A.
Fowler,
B.
Foxen,
C.
Gidney,
M. Giustina, R. Graff, T. Huang, E. Jeffrey, E. Lucero,
J. Y. Mutus,
O. Naaman,
C. Neill,
C. Quintana,
P. Roushan, D. Sank, A. Vainsencher, J. Wenner, T. C.
White,
S. Boixo,
R. Babbush,
V. N. Smelyanskiy,
H. Neven, and J. M. Martinis, Physical Review Letters
121, 090502 (2018).
[29] J. J. Burnett, A. Bengtsson, M. Scigliuzzo, D. Niepce,
M. Kudra, P. Delsing, and J. Bylander, npj Quantum
Information 5, 54 (2019).
[30] A. W. Lichtenberger, C. P. McClay, R. J. Mattauch, M. J.
Feldman, S. Pan, and A. R. Kerr, IEEE Transactions on
Magnetics 25, 1247 (1989).
[31] J. Lisenfeld, A. Bilmes, A. Megrant, R. Barends, J. Kelly,
P. Klimov, G. Weiss, J. M. Martinis, and A. V. Ustinov,
npj Quantum Information 5, 105 (2019).
[32] T. Holst, D. Esteve, C. Urbina, and M. H. Devoret, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 73, 3455 (1994).
[33] O.-P. Saira, A. Kemppinen, V. F. Maisi, and J. P. Pekola,
Physical Review B 85, 012504 (2012).
[34] J. H¨atinen, A. Ronzani, R. P. Loreto, E. Mykk¨anen,
A. Kemppinen, K. Viisanen, T. Rantanen, J. Geisor,
J. S. Lehtinen, M. Ribeiro, J.-P. Kaikkonen, O. Prakash,
V. Vesterinen, C. F¨orbom, E. T. Mannila, M. Kervinen,
J. Govenius, and M. Prunnila, Physical Review Applied
22, 064048 (2024).
[35] S. Gustavsson, F. Yan, G. Catelani, J. Bylander, A. Kamal, J. Birenbaum, D. Hover, D. Rosenberg, G. Samach,
A. P. Sears, S. J. Weber, J. L. Yoder, J. Clarke, Y. Nakamura, T. P. Orlando, A. J. Kerman, and W. D. Oliver,
Science 354, 1573 (2016).
[36] L. Bretheau, C¸. Girit, H. Pothier, D. Esteve, and
C. Urbina, Nature 499, 312 (2013).
[37] M. Zgirski, L. Bretheau, Q. Le Masne, H. Pothier, D. Esteve, and C. Urbina, Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 257003 (2011).
[38] J. Bylander, S. Gustavsson, F. Yan, F. Yoshihara,
K. Harrabi, G. Fitch, D. G. Cory, Y. Nakamura, J.-S.
Tsai, and W. D. Oliver, Nature Physics 7, 565 (2011).
[39] D. Vion, A. Aassime, A. Cottet, P. Joyez, H. Pothier,
C. Urbina, D. Esteve, and M. H. Devoret, Science 296,
886 (2002).
[40] P. Groszkowski and J. Koch, Quantum 5, 583 (2021).
[41] S. P. Chitta, T. Zhao, Z. Huang, I. Mondragon-Shem,
and J. Koch, New Journal of Physics 24, 103020 (2022).
[42] J. Koch, T. M. Yu, J. Gambetta, A. A. Houck, D. I.
Schuster, J. Majer, A. Blais, M. H. Devoret, S. M. Girvin,
and R. J. Schoelkopf, Physical Review A 76, 042319
(2007).
[43] K. Grigoras, N. Yurttagul, J.-P. Kaikkonen, E. T. Mannila, P. Eskelinen, D. P. Lozano, H.-X. Li, M. Rommel, D. Shiri, N. Tiencken, S. Simbierowicz, A. Ronzani, J. Hatinen, D. Datta, V. Vesterinen, L. Gronberg, J. Biznarova, A. F. Roudsari, S. Kosen, A. Osman,
M. Prunnila, J. Hassel, J. Bylander, and J. Govenius,
IEEE Transactions on Quantum Engineering 3, 1 (2022).
[44] J. Bizn´arov´a, A. Osman, E. Rehnman, L. Chayanun,
C. Kriˇzan, P. Malmberg, M. Rommel, C. Warren, P. Delsing, A. Yurgens, et al., npj Quantum Information 10, 78
(2024).
[45] A. Kemppinen, S. V. Lotkhov, O.-P. Saira, A. B. Zorin,
J. P. Pekola, and A. J. Manninen, Applied Physics Letters 99, 142106 (2011).
[46] F. Giazotto, T. T. Heikkil¨a, A. Luukanen, A. M. Savin,
and J. P. Pekola, Rev. Mod. Phys. 78, 217 (2006).
[47] R. C. Dynes, V. Narayanamurti, and J. P. Garno, Physical Review Letters 41, 1509 (1978).
[48] J. T. Muhonen, M. Meschke, and J. P. Pekola, Reports
on Progress in Physics 75, 046501 (2012).
