

===== Page 1 =====

 
1
The final publication will be soon available at 
http://www.springer.com/materials/nanotechnology
/journal/12274 
 
 
Large-Area Nanopatterned Graphene For Ultrasensitive Gas 
Sensing  
 
Alberto Cagliani, David Mackenzie, Lisa Katharina Tschammer, Filippo Pizzocchero, Kristoffer Almdal and 
Peter Bøggild  
 
DTU Nanotech – Center for Nanostructured Graphene (CNG) and Department of Micro- and Nanotechnology, 
Technical University of Denmark, Building 345 Ørsteds Plads, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark 
 
ABSTRACT  
Chemical vapor deposited graphene is nanopatterned by a spherical block-copolymer etch mask. The use of 
spherical rather than cylindrical block copolymers allows homogeneous patterning of cm-scale areas without 
any substrate surface treatment. Raman spectroscopy was used to study the controlled generation of point 
defects in the graphene lattice with increasing etching time, confirming that alongside the nanomesh 
patterning, the nanopatterned CVD graphene presents a high defect density between the mesh holes. The 
nanopatterned samples showed sensitivities for NO2 of more than one order of magnitude higher than for 
non-patterned graphene. NO2 concentrations as low as 300 ppt were detected with an ultimate detection 
limit of tens of ppt. This is so far the smallest value reported for not UV illuminated graphene chemiresistive 
NO2 gas sensors. The drastic improvement in the gas sensitivity is believed to be due to the high adsorption 
site density, thanks to the combination of edge sites and point defect sites. This work opens the possibility of 
large area fabrication of nanopatterned graphene with extreme density of adsorption sites for sensing 
applications.     
 
 
KEYWORDS  
Graphene, gas sensor, nitrogen dioxide, nanopatterning, defects 
 
1. Introduction 
 
After the seminal discovery of microexfoliated graphene by Geim and Novoselov in 2004, graphene has been 
suggested as a candidate for chemical sensing with the possibility of detecting individual molecules and 
charges [1,2]. Due to the extreme surface-to-volume ratio, low intrinsic noise and tenability of the doping level, 
detected concentrations from hundreds ppm down to ppb have been reached for NO2 and NH3, using 
exfoliated graphene and reduced graphene oxide [2,3,4]. The availability of large-area graphene by chemical 
vapor deposition (CVD), has made mass fabricated graphene based sensor devices possible [5,6]. The simplest 

===== Page 2 =====

 
2
detection scheme is used in chemiresistive sensors, where adsorbed molecules lead to a change in the Fermi 
level of graphene. In the case of the oxidizing and highly toxic gas NO2, the charge transfer occurs from 
graphene to the NO2 open shell molecules thus increasing the hole concentration in the graphene sheet [7]. 
Unmodified CVD graphene based gas sensors and epitaxially grown graphene based sensors able to detect 
concentrations in the hundreds ppm down to 0.1 ppm range have been demonstrated [8,9] and their cross 
sensitivity with common interfering gases investigated [9-11]. The p-doping from NO2 has been also confirmed 
by analysis of the transfer characteristic of field effect graphene transistors upon NO2 adsorption [10,12].   
However, such detected concentrations should be compared with the international standards for air quality. 
For example, the National Ambient Air Quality Standard (NAAQS) sets a limit exposure of 0.053 ppm (annual 
average) for NO2 [13]. Moreover, Hesterberg and coauthors in their comprehensive analysis of the human 
clinical studies for NO2 exposure, recommend a maximum concentration of 0.2 ppm [13]. These considerations 
imply that the relevant range of NO2 ambient concentrations is in the sub-0.1 ppm in order to prevent any 
health hazard. The NO2 minimum detected concentrations shown so far by CVD graphene based gas sensors 
are not sufficient to monitor NO2 concentration in this range. In order to improve the gas sensitivity and the 
detection limits, different approaches have been explored, even if just few of them are immediately scalable. An 
increase in the sensitivity has been achieved thanks to the introduction of structural defects, which provide 
extra adsorption sites for NO2 molecules. While different types of defects do not bind NO2 equally well, defects 
will generally lead to a stronger gas response than pristine graphene, which has no dangling bonds in the basal 
plane [14,15]. Hajati and coauthors have experimentally demonstrated a three times increase in NO2 sensitivity 
after ion bombardment and have theoretically shown that Stone-Wales structural defects are the most effective 
in binding NO2 [16]. It has been also demonstrated that treatment of CVD graphene by ozone can double the 
sensitivity with respect to pristine CVD graphene by creating defects saturated with oxygen groups, reaching a 
detected concentration of 0.2 ppm with an extrapolated detection limit of 1.3 ppb [17]. Recently, the 
introduction of a graphene nanomesh showed a promising chemiresistive performance [18]. Paul and 
coauthors fabricated nanomeshed CVD graphene using colloidal (microsphere) lithography and thereby 
obtained an improvement of approximately a factor of 4.5 (at 2 ppm) compared to unpatterned CVD graphene. 
The improvement is attributed to the large edge length per unit area of the nanomesh, which provides extra 
edge adsorption sites for the gas molecules. 
Most attempts at fabricating nanomeshed graphene have so far been motivated by the possibility of 
introducing an energy band gap [19,20,21]. Several self-aligning or bottom-up techniques have been used to 
fabricate graphene nanomesh, of which block copolymer (BCP) lithography is the most widely used 
[19,20,22,23]. In terms of gas sensing, this patterning technique offers the possibility of achieving very high 
edge length per unit area, which would increase the number of edge adsorption sites for the analyte molecules. 
All the works on BCP nanopatterning of graphene nanomesh used vertically aligned cylindrical BCPs, which 
require the surface energy to be accurately tuned in order not to favor either of the two polymeric constituents, 
as this will lead to the collapse of the vertical alignment of the cylinders upon annealing [24]. While a 
combination of long-range order and very small feature sizes can be achieved with cylindrical BCPs, the 
method requires complicated processing, with the largest nanopatterned graphene areas shown in literature 
limited to ~1 cm2 [23].   
So far, the different methods to enhance the chemiresponse of graphene based gas sensors have been 
investigated separately and without testing the gas sensors in the range relevant to prevent hazard to human 
health (sub 0.1 ppm). To the best of our knowledge only two published works have achieved enough sensitivity 
to test their graphene based gas sensors in the sub 0.1 ppm range. A drastic improvement of the gas sensitivity 
was reported for CVD graphene exposed in-situ to UV light [25]. However, in another study carbon nanotubes 
were shown to lose the sensor performance upon UV irradiation after few hours and the role of UV light 
during the gas sensing is still not understood [25,26]. Moreover, continuous UV illumination would strongly 
limit the portability, increase the cost and power consumption of such a sensor. Detection in the concentration 
range of interest was also reported for devices based on epitaxial graphene 4H-SiC, reaching a minimum 

===== Page 3 =====

 
3
detected concentration of 10 ppb [27].  
In this work we present a wafer scalable nanopatterning method that combines a high edge length per unit area 
and the controlled generation of structural point defects by ion bombardment. Our approach is to use spherical 
block copolymer (s-BCP) lithography as a patterning mask, since this is robust and scalable compared to 
cylindrical block copolymers (c-BCP). We have fabricated graphene gas sensors from nanopatterned CVD 
graphene and exposed them to NO2  in the 300 ppt to 100 ppb range. Our results present a drastic 
improvement of the response with respect to previous works on NO2  graphene based gas sensors. The 
response was 7% at 300 ppt, which is the lowest measured concentration for NO2 reported to date for a 
chemiresistive graphene sensor, except the work on UV illuminated sensors. Based on our Raman analysis of 
the defect density we suggest that the strong NO2 response is due to the simultaneous contribution from edge 
adsorption sites and inter-hole point defects.  
 
2 Results and Discussion 
 
2.1 Nanopatterning using the PS-b-PMMA spherical block copolymer nanomask 
 
CVD graphene transferred to oxidized silicon surfaces (for details of growth and transfer see the Experimental 
Section) was patterned into a nanomesh. The process sequence is described in Fig. 1a. Graphene is initially 
covered with a 15 nm thin layer of electron beam evaporated silicon dioxide (SiOx). Afterwards, a 40-50 nm 
thick layer of polystyrene-b-poly methyl methacrylate (PS-b-PMMA) BCP is spin cast on top, without any 
pretreatment of the surface.  For a 40-50nm s-BCP PS-b-PMMA film, the PMMA spheres segregate at the top of 
the film with a short-range hexagonal ordering (Fig. 1b and Fig. 1a-ii). The local order has been studied as a 
function of the annealing parameters and it was found to be highly robust with respect to variation of the main 
process parameters, maintaining the hexagonal order in the range 180 oC to 230 oC and in the 3h to 24h 
annealing time range. 
 The PMMA spheres are then removed using a flood UV exposure, followed by an acetic acid bath, leaving a 
nanoporous polystyrene thin film (Fig. 1a-iii). Reactive ion etching with an O2/Ar plasma was used to etch the 
remaining polystyrene layer until the SiOx layer was reached. The directionality of the etching is ensured by the 
low pressure of the process and a low O2/Ar ratio. As shown in Fig. 1b the SiOx layer is not reached for all the 
polystyrene nanopits at the same time (the white spots in the SEM images in Fig. 1b appears where the SiOx 
has been reached). This is to be expected, since the PMMA sphere diameter in this work varies between 10 to 50 
nm. An optimization of the etching time is necessary in order to maximize the number of nanopits fully open, 
avoiding at the same time over-etching of the polystyrene nanomask. This process leaves a polystyrene holey 
layer of approximately 10 to 15 nm in thickness, which serves as a nanomask for the subsequent etching of the 
SiOx layer (Fig. 1b and Fig. 1a-iv). 
When the polysterene nanomask is completed, the SiOx layer is etched using a CHF3/CF4 plasma (Fig. 1a-v). 
Afterwards, an oxygen plasma removes the residual BCP nanomask and etches the graphene through the holes 
in the SiOx mask. Finally, a 2 seconds dip in HF 5% is sufficient to remove the e-beam evaporated SiOx (Fig. 
1a-vi). As shown in Fig. 2 the process time for the SiOx etching is critical in determining the morphology of the 
nanopatterned graphene. By changing this etching time, it is possible to tune the morphology of the 
nanopatterned graphene ranging from few sparse holes to a densely nanoporous, nearly discontinuous 
graphene layer. In Fig. 2c the fraction of removed graphene in percent and the corresponding edge length per 
unit area are shown for four different etching times. The same patterning process has been applied to exfoliated 
graphene and the comparison with CVD graphene can be seen in Fig. S-1 in the Electronic Supplementary 
Material (ESM). The size distribution of the holes is considerably broader as compared to typical results with 
c-BCPs, and for the longest etching time the short-range hexagonal order is lost. Fig. 2a presents a 4 cm2 piece 
of CVD fully nanopatterned graphene. 
 

===== Page 4 =====

 
4
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 (a) Microfabriaction sequence of the nanopatterning. (i) CVD graphene is transferred on silicon dioxide.(ii) It is covered with 
15 nm of silicon oxide and the spherical block copolymer PS-b-PMMA is spin-cast on top and subsequently annealed. The 
cross-sectional view shows the inner geometry of the BCP. (ii) After an exposure to UV light the PMMA spheres are removed in acetic 
acid. (iv) An oxygen plasma is used to etch the polystyrene nanomask until the nanopits are all open. (v) A fluorine based plasma is used 
to etch the SiOx layer. An oxygen plasma removes the residual BCP and patterns the graphene. (vi) A 5% HF dip removes the remaining 
SiOx. (b) SEM micrographs showing the top views of the polystyrene nanomask after different etching times in O2/Ar plasma. The inset 
shows a SEM micrograph of the top view of the PS-b-PMMA BCP before etching. After 30 seconds no nanopits have reached the SiOx 
layer. After 78 seconds of etching, approximately ~50% of the pits are have reached the SiOx layer. After 80 seconds of etching, ~90% 
of the pits are cleared. After 82 seconds of etching, ~95% of the pits reach the SiOx layer and some of the holes are merged. The scale 
bars are 300 nm (200 nm in the insert) 
 
+
 
 
Figure 2 (a) SEM micrographs of CVD nanopatterned graphene. a) Large view of CVD graphene when 26 seconds etching of the SiOx 
protective mask is used. The insets show the nanopattern. (b) Nanopattern when 32 seconds etching of the SiOx protective mask is used. 
The scale bars are 200 nm for insets.(c) Graphene removal percentage and edge length per area ratio for nanopatterned CVD graphene. 
For 22 seconds of SiOx etching the pattern is not transferred. After 26 seconds 13% is removed with an edge length per unit area of 19 
µm/µm2. For 32 seconds the 28% is removed with an edge length per unit area of 28 µm/µm2. For 35 seconds 38% is removed with an 
edge length per unit are of 32 µm/µm2.  
 
Typically, a random copolymer, which contains the same polymeric components as the BCP, and thus exhibits 
the average surface energy of the two polymers, is used to ensure the vertical alignment of the cylindrical block 
copolymer on top [23]. Spherical BCP are always correctly oriented instead, so no fine-tuning of the surface 

===== Page 5 =====

 
5
energy is needed as long as the polymer wets the surface – this makes processing and formation of 
homogeneous spherical BCP lithography mask intrinsically simpler than for cylindrical BCP. While the s-BCP 
structures are more disordered than the c-BCP and colloidal nanosphere lithography, no evidence of the 
long-range order to play any role in the sensing properties has been reported. The edge length per unit area 
achieved with our nanopatterning technique is up to 32 µm/µm2 (Fig. 2c) and compared to previous works on 
graphene nanomesh for gas sensing, the edge length per unit area and thus the estimated density of edge 
adsorption sites for gas molecules is a factor of 2 higher [18]. 
So far very few works have reported a nanopatterned area larger than 1 cm2 using BCPs or any other technique 
[18,24,28]. This is because it is difficult to achieve a uniform holey mask across cm2 large areas. The morphology 
of our BCP film after annealing as well as after etching is highly uniform across an entire 4” inch wafer (see Fig. 
S-2 in the Electronic Supplementary Material (ESM)), but a larger nanopatterned area could not be achieved due 
to space limitations in the e-beam deposition system used to deposit SiOx. Finally, several factors can affect the 
uniformity at different length scales, in particular microscale particles that introduce variation in the BCP layer 
thickness, and the uniformity of the etch rate of the RIE machine. These factors, however, would have a similar 
impact on other lithographic techniques. 
 
2.2. Electrical and gas measurements 
 
After nanopatterning, the three different CVD graphene films with 13%, 28% and 38% of the total area removed 
was transferred using a wedging process onto a silicon substrate with 300 nm thermal oxide and 
lithographically defined 4 µm wide electrical contacts (5 nm Cr/45 nm Au), as shown in Fig. 3a [29]. A device is 
shown in Fig. S-3. In order to characterize the transport characteristics and the gas response of our 
nanopatterned graphene a Linkam LS600P enclosed custom probe station was used.  Gas measurements were 
performed in an atmosphere of synthetic air with a small (0.3 bar) under-pressure applied to the chamber. The 
system allowed for concurrent measurements of two devices, so that a nanopatterned sample could be 
compared to a non-patterned sample simultaneously. The electrical resistance of the graphene devices was 
measured as a function of gas concentration and temperature. All the devices showed p-doping at zero-gate 
bias, most probably a consequence of the transfer process [30]. Therefore, lowering in the Fermi level, due to 
the charge transfer to NO2 molecules, corresponds to a decrease in the total resistance. It is important to notice 
that the conductance versus gate voltage characteristics of the CVD nanopatterned graphene maintained the 
typical graphene like shape, showing p-doping and lower conductance values with respect to non-patterned 
CVD graphene (see Fig. S-4 in the Electronic Supplementary Material (ESM)). All the measurements were 
performed following the same experimental sequence. The graphene devices were initially annealed in 
nitrogen atmosphere at 225 oC for two hours to remove gas and water molecules adsorbed on the graphene. 
After stabilizing the temperature, NO2 was permitted into the chamber for 120 seconds followed by a recovery 
period of 240 seconds, with the exception of sub-ppb gas concentrations, where the active measurement time 
was increased from 120 seconds to 20 minutes. Three gas injections were done for each set of conditions, 
followed by annealing at 225 oC for five minutes in order to remove residual gas molecules before the next 
experiment.  
Direct comparison of unpatterned to nanopatterned CVD graphene showed a significantly higher response to 
NO2 for nanopatterned graphene.  Fig. 3b shows a typical response to 100 ppb NO2. At t = 60 seconds, 100 ppb 
NO2 is allowed into the gas chamber for 120 seconds followed by 240 seconds recovery phase. The black line 
shows a non-patterned device response, which exhibited a -1.2% change (after first gas injection), which is 
considerably less than the -7.5% for the nanopatterned graphene. In order to quantitatively compare the gas 
responses of our graphene devices the relative changes 2 minutes after each injection will be used in the 
subsequent analysis. 
   

===== Page 6 =====

 
6
 
 
Figure 3 (a) The set-up used: a CVD nanopatterned device and a CVD non-nanopatterned device are placed in the chamber at the same 
time and measured using two voltage sources and two source measure units (SMU). (b) Typical response to 100 ppb NO2 with the 
response of nanopatterned graphene (38% removed) shown in red and non-patterned shown in black. 
Table 1 Gas Response data after the first gas injection of the non-patterned and nanopatterned devices. 
Sample 
Sensitivity 
1 ppb 
Sensitivity 
10 ppb 
RMS noise SNR at 1 ppb SNR at 10 ppb 
Non-patterned 
0.15% 
0.36% 
0.2% 
1< 
2 
13% 
1.8% 
4.5% 
0.57% 
3 
8 
28% 
2.6% 
6.6% 
0.09% 
29 
73 
28% 
4.4% 
10% 
0.26% 
17 
43 
38% 
6.2% 
7.5% 
0.39% 
16 
19 
 
 
Fig. 4a shows the room-temperature response 2 minutes after the first injection of various samples to NO2 
concentrations of 1 ppb, 10 ppb and 100 ppb. For all concentrations, the nanopatterned graphene response is 
significantly larger than that of the non-patterned graphene and the expected correlation between 
concentration and the device response was observed, where an increase in the concentration corresponds to an 
increased response. The sensitivity at 10 ppb and 1 ppb, the level of noise and the signal to noise ratios (SNR) 
for the devices are summarized in Table 1. An increase of the SNR up to of a factor 37 is observed with respect 
to non-patterned CVD graphene.  
In Fig. 4b-c the sensor responses after all the three injections at 1 ppb and 10 ppb are presented at room 
temperature and 175oC respectively. In the Electronic Supplementary Material (ESM) the data for 100 ppb at 
175 oC are disclosed. As can be expected the sensor response is decreasing after each gas injection, even if the 
nanopatterned sensors remain significantly more sensitive than the non-nanopatterned. The decrease is due to 
the saturation of the adsorption sites, which is not fully recovered in the 4 minutes of desorption time in 
between the gas injections. The response decrease is more pronounced for the nanopatterned devices, 
indicating that the binding energy of the adsorption sites is different. This is coherent with the fact that the 
nanopatterned devices have a high density of defects which are known to have higher binding energies than 
the graphene basal plane [14-16]. The difference in binding energy of NO2 molecules is supported by the fact 
that the decrease of gas sensitivity is reduced when the sensor is operated at 175oC, allowing for a faster 
desorption between the gas injections.                   
   

===== Page 7 =====

 
7
 
 
Figure 4. a) Response of all samples at 25oC, 2 minutes after the first injection of 1, 10, 100 ppb NO2. b) Response of all samples after 
each injection for 1 ppb at 25 oC . c) Response of all samples at 10 ppb at 175 oC.d) Response of non-patterned versus nanopatterned 
sample (28% removed) at 125oC for sub-ppb concentrations with 20 minute NO2 exposure intervals. Inset: Response for a 28% 
removed sample at 125oC over at different concentrations. 
 
In order to test the minimum detectable concentration the NO2 concentration was lowered below 1 ppb, by 
increasing the dilution. Fig. 4d shows a clear sub-ppb response for a nanopatterned graphene device with 28% 
removal. The larger absolute responses compared to Fig. 4a are due to the prolonged active measurement 
period of 20 minutes. Even at the lowest dilution, which could be reached accurately (300 ppt) the sensor reacts 
with change of approximately -7% (2% after 2 minutes).  The signal to noise ratio in this case is 26, suggesting 
that much lower concentrations can be detected.     
While there is a clear tendency of response enhancement from nanopatterning, and sub 300 ppt detected 
concentrations have been demonstrated, the devices show a too large variation in the NO2 response to draw 
any defined conclusion on the quantitative relationship between removal percentage and gas response. 
However, it should be noticed that the 13% removed device is less sensitive than 28% removed and 38% 
removed devices in almost all conditions of temperature and concentration. This is consistent with the notion 
that shorter edge length per area gives less adsorption sites for the NO2 molecules and that shorter etching time 
generates fewer inter-hole point defects. By comparing the 2 minutes response values in Fig. 4 with the most 
sensitive sensors from other works, our responses are much larger and the response times are dramatically 
faster. For instance, the CVD nanomesh graphene sensor reports a response similar to Fig. 4, however, with a 15 
minute response time and for a 1000 times higher concentration [18]. This drastic difference cannot be ascribed 
only to the increased edge length, because, as mentioned in section 2.1, the edge length per unit area achieved 
with our nanopatterning process is just twice that achieved by the nanomeshed chemisensors [18]. This 
indicates that the intimate nature of the CVD nanopatterned graphene used is very different. In section 3 this  

===== Page 8 =====

 
8
 
Figure 5. (a) Graphene Spectra after SiOx deposition and etching. (b) I(D)/I(G) and I(D)/I(D’) ratios measured on SiO2/exfoliated 
graphene/SiOx samples as a function of the etching time using the fluorine based plasma recipe in the RIE chamber. The I(D)/I(G) ratio 
increases for longer etching times. Three spectra were taken per each sample. 
 
difference is attributed to the high density of inter-hole point defects. Comparing with the work of Yavari et al., 
the response at 100 ppb of their CVD based sensors and our non-patterned CVD sensors are similar after 2 
minutes (~-1%). However, our nanopatterned sensors reach much larger responses (up to -13.8%) in just 2 
minutes at 100 ppb, giving more than one order of magnitude improvement in the response [8]. Comparing 
with the ozone treated CVD graphene, which shows a response of --0.5% after 20 minutes at 200 ppb, we have a 
response up to 26 times larger in only two minutes at 100 ppb [17]. Novikov and coauthors showed a -7% 
change upon exposure to 10 ppb after 20 minutes, whereas our sensors reached the same relative change for a 
concentration 33 times lower [27]. Finally, the signal-to-noise ratios in Table 1 and data in Fig. 4 suggest that 
much smaller concentrations could be detected and detection limits in the tens of ppt range are achievable with 
a basic chemiresistive graphene sensor. In literature, it is common to extrapolate the detection limit of a 
graphene gas sensor, based on the supposition of a linear relation between sensor response and concentration 
of NO2 [17,18,25,31]. The detection limit may then be inferred as the RMS noise of the measurement divided by 
the slope of the linear curve response versus concentration. This approach relies on the very strong assumption 
that the linear response can be extrapolated outside the measured range by several orders of concentration 
magnitude, since the measurements are done at much higher concentrations with respect to the calculated 
detection limit. Our data in Fig. 4 in the 100 ppb to 300 ppt range contradict this behavior showing a strong 
non-linearity (note the logarithmic scale). To the best of our knowledge, the data presented in this work are the 
first data presented for sub 10 ppb concentrations for not UV illuminated graphene based sensors. 
 
2.3 Defect analysis by Raman spectroscopy  
  
In order to understand why our samples have so high sensitivity, we investigated by Raman spectroscopy 
whether the nanopatterning process in addition to creating nanosize holes in the graphene also generates point 
defects in the graphene between the nanoholes. To perform this analysis we used non-nanopatterned 
SiO2/exfoliated graphene/SiOx structures. In this case the single layer exfoliated graphene flakes on thermal 
SiO2, with no visible D-peak and an I(2D)/I(G) ratio larger than 1 (laser wavelength = 532 nm) were covered by 
15 nm SiOx as described before for the nanopatterned samples. The absence of nanopatterning or initial D-peak 
in these test structures permitted to attribute a possible D peak evolution to point defects  only  and not at 
the edges as in the case of nanopatterned samples. The Raman spectra were acquired leaving the remaining 
SiOx on top of the exfoliated graphene, since we checked that there is no measurable difference in the spectra 
after removing the SiOx layer in BHF. After the SiOx deposition step an I(D)/I(G) ratio of 0.18 was found, 

===== Page 9 =====

 
9
indicating that the graphene is slightly damaged by the SiOx deposition (see Fig. 5a). The samples were then 
etched with the same reactive ion etching recipe used for nanopatterning of the SiOx layer (see Fig. 1a-v). The 
etching time was increased in steps until the point where the SiOx layer was entirely removed. Ellipsometer 
measurements showed 5 nm retained after 12.5 seconds, 2 nm retained after 17.5 seconds and the SiOx layer is 
etched away after 22.5 seconds. We recorded the evolution of two defect activated peaks, D peak at ~1340 cm-1 
and the D’ peak at ~1620 cm-1, as a function of the SiOx etching time. The evolution of the Raman spectra is 
shown in Fig. 5a, whereas the intensity of the I(D)/I(G) ratio as function of the etching time is presented in Fig. 
5b. The I(D)/I(G) ratio increases for longer etching times, until reaching a value of 2.9 (see Fig. 5b). 
The evolution of the I(D)/I(G) ratio indicates that the point defect density in the exfoliated test graphene 
increases for longer RIE etching times, despite the presence of the initial 15 nm SiOx on top of the graphene. 
This trend can be explained by the energetic ions accelerated by the DC voltage inside the RIE chamber 
towards the SiOx layer being capable of penetrating the progressively thinner evaporated silicon oxide and 
damaging the graphene lattice underneath. Following the method described by Cançado et al., it is possible to 
calculate the point defect density expressed by the characteristic distance between defects LD [32]. In their work 
they related the I(D)/I(G) ratio with LD deriving the formula LD 2 = 1.8x10-9x4(I(D)/I(G))-1, where  is the laser 
wavelength. The obtained LD values for our samples are 17 nm, 13 nm, 11 nm, ~7 nm, ~5 nm, for etching times 
of 10 s, 12.5 s, 15 s, 17.5 s, 20.5 s and 22.5s, respectively. Since the formula used is valid only for LD > 10 nm, the 
last two values are read from Fig. 3 in ref [32]. Considering that the SiOx layer was entirely removed from 17.5 
to 22.5 seconds etching time, we conclude that our nanopatterned graphene must have a defect characteristic 
length close to LD = 7 nm, corresponding to a density of one defect per 265 carbon atoms. Therefore, comparing 
the dimensions of the nanopattern in Fig. 2, where the typical neck width between the nanoholes is 
significantly larger than 7 nm, we can conclude that defects are very dense compared to the BCP created 
nanopattern. Since a strong enhancement in the gas response has been measured for graphene with much 
lower defect densities, we expect that the inter-hole point defects originating from the etching process are 
playing an important role in the high gas response of our sensors [16]. Finally, the evolution of the I(D)/I(G) 
ratio can elucidate the degree of lattice disorder of the samples. According to the amorphization trajectory for 
graphene described in ref [32], a value of the I(D)/I(G) ratio of 3 (green laser) is the delimitation value between 
end of stage I and beginning of stage II. The nanopatterned CVD graphene investigated here should then be at 
the end of stage I, with mainly sp2 hybridization and nanocrystalline lattice order.   
We note that in the previous works concerning graphene nanomesh for electronic application, a 10 nm thin 
SiOx layer was used on top of graphene [19,20]. Neither of these discussed the possibility of the graphene 
below the mask to be damaged as well between the holes. Based on our results, we anticipate that 
co-generation of inter-hole defects may be a general issue for block copolymer lithography of graphene, which 
will become progressively more serious as neck width and thus mask thickness decrease. 
Recent works by Eckmann et al. [33,34] pointed out that the I(D)/I(G) intensity ratio alone is not sufficient to 
determine the nature of the defect, but that the I(D)/I(D’) ratio behaves distinctly differently depending on the 
type of defect. To investigate the nature of the point defects between the holes generated during the silicon 
oxide etching plasma, we analyzed the I(D)/I(D’) ratio in our exfoliated samples (see Fig. 5b). In our case we 
measured an I(D)/I(D’) ratio evolving from ~4.5 to ~5.5 with the etching time. 
Eckmann and coauthors reported that sp3 sites, vacancies, substitutional Boron atoms and grain boundaries 
defects show an I(D)/I(D’) ratio of ~13, ~7,~9,~3.5 respectively [33,34]. These ratio values were measured in 
samples dominated by a single type of defect with the specific ratio I(D)/I(D’) remaining constant for a wide 
range of defect densities in the regime LD > 10 nm . Since our I(D)/I(D’) ratio values evolve from ~4.5 to ~5.5 (for 
LD ≥ 11 nm), this methodology suggests that the ion-bombardment through the SiOx layer is generating a 
mixture of grain boundary-like defects and vacancies and that the relative generation rate of these two types of 
defects changes with the energy of the ions reaching the graphene, due to the gradual thinning of the SiOx 
layer. The creation of boundary-like defects is particularly interesting because, it has been shown that 
Stone-Wales defects (typical grain boundaries structures) are the most efficient type of defect in binding NO2 

===== Page 10 =====

 
10
molecules [14,16]. However, the creation of boundary like defects has to be confirmed by further experiments, 
since ion bombardment is generally considered a source of vacancy like defects [33]. Moreover, a higher 
concentration of grain boundaries has been used to justify a higher sensitivity to NO2 for different types of 
CVD graphene [18]. 
 
3. Conclusions 
 
We report readily scalable nanopatterning technique for cm2 scale CVD graphene. The fabricated NO2 gas 
sensors using the nanopatterned CVD graphene demonstrate unprecedented conductivity response in the sub 
100 ppb range of NO2. Resistance changes up to -6.7% and -10% have been measured after just 2 minutes 
exposure at 1 pbb and 10 ppb concentrations. Moreover, the high measured signal-to-noise ratio at a 
concentration of 300 ppt, indicates that tens of ppt resolution is within reach. Based on the Raman analysis of 
the defect density, we suggest that the observed sensitivity may not just be accounted for by the large edge 
length per area of the dense nanopatterned structures, but also by the generation of point defects between the 
nanoholes despite presence of a thin SiOx etch mask. Such defect generation under the etch mask could have 
implications for the application of BCP lithography for other electronic applications, as defects in nearly all 
other such applications will be detrimental to the performance. Areas as large as 4 cm2 were patterned without 
any substrate surface treatment, and were in our case limited by the available physical sample space in one of 
the necessary processing steps. This work shows that ultrasensitive NO2 gas sensors can be fabricated with a 
robust, scalable nanopatterning technique. 
 
4. Experimental methods 
 
CVD graphene was grown on a copper foil in an Aixtron Black Magic cold wall CVD system following a typical, 
common recipe [7]. The graphene was then transferred on oxidized silicon wafers by etching the metal growth 
substrate with ammonium persulfate [28]. The block copolymer used is PS-b-PMMA (195K-20K) purchased 
from Polymer Source. The block copolymer annealing carried out at 230 oC for 12 hours in low vacuum. In 
order to remove the PMMA spheres the samples were exposed to UV light (I-line) with an intensity of 7 W/cm2 
for 45 seconds, and subsequently immersed in acetic acid for 15 minutes and then rinsed with DI water. A 
plasma containing oxygen and argon (5 sccm and 45 sccm, respectively) at a pressure of 10 mTorr and 30W of 
power was used in a Reactive Ion Etching (RIE) machine to etch the remaining nanoporous polystyrene layer in 
order to form the nanomask. The same RIE machine was used to etch the SiOx layer. In this case the plasma 
contained CHF3 and CF4 (26 sccm and 14 sccm, respectively) at a pressure of 100 mTorr and a power of 60 W. 
The final recipe used to remove the residual polystyrene contains oxygen and argon (45 sccm and 5 sccm, 
respectively) and the machine was operated at 10 mTorr and 30 W of power for 30 seconds. The remaining 
electron beam evaporated silicon dioxide was removed with a 2 seconds dip in 5% HF, followed by a rinse in 
DI water and isopropanol. In order to characterize the samples, a Supra 40VP Zeiss SEM microscope and 
ThermoFisher DXR Raman system was used with a 532 nm wavelength at 0.8 mW power. Keithley 2400 source 
measure units (SMU) were used to supply voltage and measure current within a customized Linkam LS600P 
environmental measurement chamber. Device temperature could be controlled between 123 K and 423 K ± 0.1 
K. Keithley 2000 voltmeters were used to measure four-point voltages, while the current was sourced by a 
Keithley 2400 Sourcemeter. Source and measurement instruments, device temperature, gas flow and recording 
of data were controlled via LabView. The 100 ppb NO2 in synthetic air bottle was diluted in 99.999 % synthetic 
air using Tylan flow controllers connected in parallel.  
 
 
 

===== Page 11 =====

 
11
Acknowledgements 
 
The authors wish to thank the Center for Nanopatterned Graphene and the European Project NMP-FP7 Grafol 
for the financial support. The Center for Nanostructured Graphene (CNG) is sponsored by the Danish National 
Research Foundation, Project DNRF58. The authors would like to thank Dr. Tim J. Booth for the fruitful 
discussion and DTU-Danchip personnel for the help during the microfabrication. 
 
Electronic Supplementary Material:  
A comparison between nanopatterned CVD graphene and micro exfoliated nanopatterned graphene is presented, as well as 
a full wafer s-BCP sample. A current-gate voltage characteristic of nanopatterned CVD graphene is shown, along with and 
optical image of one of the devices. The response of all devices after each injection for 100 ppb NO2 is also presented.  
 
References 
 
[1] 
Novoselov, K. S.; Geim, A. K.; Morozov, S. V.; Jiang, D.; Zhang, Y.; Dubonos, S. V.; Grigorieva, I. V.; Firsov, A. A. Electric 
field effect in atomically thin carbon films. Science 2004, 306, 5696. 
[2] 
Schedin, F.; Geim, A. K.; Morozov, S. V.; Hill, E. W.; Blake, P.; Katsnelson, M. I.; Novoselov, K. S. Detection of individual gas 
molecules adsorbed on graphene. Nat. Mater. 2007, 6, 652. 
[3] 
Hwang, S.; Lim, J.; Park, H. G.; Kim, W. K.; Kim, D.-H.; Song, I. S.; Kim, J. H.; Lee, S.; Woo, D. H.; Jun, S. C. Chemical 
vapor sensing properties of graphene based on geometrical evaluation. Curren. App. Phys. 2012, 12, 1017. 
[4]  Yuan, W.; Shi, G. Graphene-based gas sensors. J. Mater. Chem. A 2013, 10078–10091. 
[5]  Li, X.; Cai, W.; An, J.; Kim, S.; Nah, J.; Yang, D.; Piner, R.; Velamakanni, A.; Jung, I.; Tutuc, E.; Banerjee, S. K.; Colombo, L.; 
Ruoff, R. S. Large-area synthesis of high-quality and uniform graphene films on copper foils. Science 2009, 324, 1312–4. 
[6] Bae, S.; Kim, H.; Lee, Y.; Xu, X.; Park, J.-S.;    Zheng, Y.; Balakrishnan, J.; Lei, T.; Kim, H. R.; Song, Y. Il; Kim, Y.-J.; Kim, 
K. S.; Ozyilmaz, B.; Ahn, J.-H.; Hong, B. H.; Iijima, S. Roll-to-roll production of 30-inch graphene    films for transparent 
electrodes. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2010, 5, 574–8. 
[7] Crowther, A. C.; Ghassaei, A.; Jung, N.; Brus, L. E. Strong charge-transfer doping of 1 to 10 layer graphene by NO₂. ACS Nano 
2012, 6,1865–75. 
[8] Yavari, F.; Castillo, E.; Gullapalli, H.; Ajayan, P. M.; Koratkar, N. High sensitivity detection of NO2 and NH3 in air using 
chemical vapor deposition grown graphene. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2012, 100, 203120. 
[9] Nomani, M. W. K.; Shishir, R.; Qazi, M.; Diwan, D.; Shields, V. B.; Spencer, M. G.; Tompa, G. S.; Sbrockey, N. M.; Koley, G. 
Highly sensitive and selective detection of NO2 using epitaxial graphene on 6H-SiC. Sensors Actuators B Chem. 2010, 150, 
301–307. 
[10] Kim, C.; Yoo, S.; Nam, D. Effect of Temperature and Humidity on NO2 and NH3 Gas Sensitivity of Bottom-Gate Graphene  
    FETs Prepared by ICP-CVD. IEEE Electron Device 2012, 33, 1084–1086. 
[11] An, X.; Yu, J. C.; Wang, Y.; Hu, Y.; Yu, X.; Zhang, G. WO3 nanorods/graphene nanocomposites for high-efficiency  
    visible-light-driven photocatalysis and NO2 gas sensing. J. Mater. Chem. 2012, 22, 8525. 
[12] Lu, G.; Park, S.; Yu, K.; Ruoff, R. S.; Ocola, L. E.; Rosenmann, D.; Chen, J. Toward practical gas sensing with highly reduced  
    graphene oxide: a new signal processing method to circumvent run-to-run and device-to-device variations. ACS Nano 2011, 5,     
    1154–64. 
[13] Hesterberg, T. W.; Bunn, W. B.; McClellan, R. O.; Hamade, A. K.; Long, C. M.; Valberg, P. A Critical review of the human data 
on short-term nitrogen dioxide (NO2) exposures: evidence for NO2 no-effect levels. Crit. Rev. Toxicol. 2009, 39, 743–81. 
[14] Zhang, Y.-H.; Zhou, K.-G.; Xie, K.-F.; Gou, X.-C.; Zeng, J.; Zhang, H.-L.; Peng, Y. Effects of Stone-Wales Defect on the 
Interactions Between NH3, NO2 and Graphene. J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 2010, 10, 7347–7350. 

===== Page 12 =====

 
12
[15] Zhang, Y.-H.; Chen, Y.-B.; Zhou, K.-G.; Liu, C.-H.; Zeng, J.; Zhang, H.-L.; Peng, Y. Improving gas sensing properties of 
graphene by introducing dopants and defects: a first-principles study. Nanotechnology 2009, 20, 185504. 
[16] Hajati, Y.; Blom, T.; Jafri, S. H. M.; Haldar, S.; Bhandary, S.; Shoushtari, M. Z.; Eriksson, O.; Sanyal, B.; Leifer, K. Improved 
gas sensing activity in structurally defected bilayer graphene. Nanotechnology 2012, 23, 505501. 
[17] Chung, M. G.; Kim, D. H.; Lee, H. M.; Kim, T.; Choi, J. H.; Seo, D. K.; Yoo, J.-B.; Hong, S.-H.; Kang, T. J.; Kim, Y. H. Highly 
sensitive NO2 gas sensor based on ozone treated graphene. Sensors Actuators B Chem. 2012, 166-167, 172–176. 
[18] Paul, R. K.; Badhulika, S.; Saucedo, N. M.; Mulchandani, A. Graphene nanomesh as highly sensitive chemiresistor gas sensor. 
Anal. Chem. 2012, 84, 8171–8. 
[19] Bai, J.; Zhong, X.; Jiang, S.; Huang, Y.; Duan, X. Graphene nanomesh. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2010, 5, 190–4. 
[20] Kim, M.; Safron, N. S.; Han, E.; Arnold, M. S.; Gopalan, P. Fabrication and characterization of large-area, semiconducting 
nanoperforated graphene materials. Nano Lett. 2010, 10, 1125–31. 
[21] Pedersen, T.; Flindt, C.; Pedersen, J.; Mortensen, N.; Jauho, A.-P.; Pedersen, K. Graphene Antidot Lattices: Designed Defects 
and Spin Qubits. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2008, 100, 1–4. 
[22] Liang, X.; Jung, Y.-S.; Wu, S.; Ismach, A.; Olynick, D. L.; Cabrini, S.; Bokor, J. Formation of bandgap and subbands in 
graphene nanomeshes with sub-10 nm ribbon width fabricated via nanoimprint lithography. Nano Lett. 2010, 10, 2454–60. 
[23] Kim, M.; Safron, N. S.; Han, E.; Arnold, M. S.; Gopalan, P. Electronic transport and Raman scattering in size-controlled 
nanoperforated graphene. ACS Nano 2012, 6, 9846–54. 
[24] Han, E.; Stuen, K. O.; La, Y.; Nealey, P. F.; Gopalan, P. Effect of Composition of Substrate-Modifying Random Copolymers on 
the Orientation of Symmetric and Asymmetric Diblock Copolymer Domains. Macromolecules 2008, 41, 9090–9097. 
[25] Chen, G.; Paronyan, T. M.; Harutyunyan, A. R. Sub-ppt gas detection with pristine graphene. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2012, 101, 
053119. 
[26] Chen, G.; Paronyan, T. M.; Pigos, E. M.; Harutyunyan, A. R. Enhanced gas sensing in pristine carbon nanotubes under 
continuous ultraviolet light illumination. Sci. Rep. 2012, 2, 343. 
[27] Novikov, S.; Satrapinski, A.; Lebedeva, N.; Iisakka, I. Sensitivity Optimization of Epitaxial Graphene-Based Gas Sensors. IEEE 
Trans. Instrum. Meas. 2013, 62, 1859–1864. 
[28] Zeng, Z.; Huang, X.; Yin, Z.; Li, H.; Chen, Y.; Li, H.; Zhang, Q.; Ma, J.; Boey, F.; Zhang, H. Fabrication of Graphene Nanomesh 
by Using an Anodic Aluminum Oxide Membrane as a Template. Adv. Mater. 2012, 1–5. 
[29] Schneider, G. F.; Calado, V. E.; Zandbergen, H.;  Vandersypen, L. M. K.; Dekker, C. Wedging transfer of nanostructures. Nano 
Lett. 2010, 10, 1912–6. 
[30] Pirkle, a.; Chan, J.; Venugopal, a.; Hinojos, D.; Magnuson, C. W.; McDonnell, S.; Colombo, L.; Vogel, E. M.; Ruoff, R. S.; 
Wallace, R. M. The effect of chemical residues on the physical and electrical properties of chemical vapor deposited graphene 
transferred to SiO2. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2011, 99, 122108. 
[31] Dua, V.; Surwade, S. P.; Ammu, S.; Agnihotra, S. R.; Jain, S.; Roberts, K. E.; Park, S.; Ruoff, R. S.; Manohar, S. K. All-organic 
vapor sensor using inkjet-printed reduced graphene oxide. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 2010, 49, 2154–7. 
[32] Cançado, L. G.; Jorio, a; Ferreira, E. H. M.; Stavale, F.; Achete, C. A; Capaz, R. B.; Moutinho, M. V. O.; Lombardo, a; Kulmala, 
T. S.; Ferrari, a C. Quantifying defects in graphene via Raman spectroscopy at different excitation energies. Nano Lett. 2011, 11, 
3190–6. 
[33] Eckmann, A.; Felten, A.; Mishchenko, A.; Britnell, L.; Krupke, R.; Novoselov, K. S.; Casiraghi, C. Probing the nature of defects 
in graphene by Raman spectroscopy. Nano Lett. 2012, 12, 3925–30. 
[34] Eckmann, A.; Felten, A.; Verzhbitskiy, I.; Davey, R.; Casiraghi, C. Raman study on defective graphene: Effect of the excitation 
energy, type, and amount of defects. Phys. Rev. B 2013, 88, 035426. 

===== Page 13 =====

 
13
Electronic Supplementary Material 
 
 
Large-Area Nanopatterned Graphene For Ultrasensitive Gas 
Sensing  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure S-1 Nanopatterned graphene using spherical block copolymer was realized also for micro-cleaved 
grapehene. Single layers were identified and patterned using the same recipe described for CVD grapehene. 
The pattern removal percentages and the morphology of the patterns are similar for the two cases. a) 26 
seconds for the SiOx etching, b) 32 seconds for the SiOx etching. The scale bars are 100 nm. 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

===== Page 14 =====

 
14
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure S-2 Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) micrographs of 4 different positions on a 4 inches wafer 
cover with the spherical block copolymer. After the annealing the PMMA spheres are organized in a hexagonal 
pattern with a short range order across the entire wafer. (a) center of the wafer, (b) left, (c) right, (d) bottom. The 
green dots indicate the position where the image was taken. The scale bars are 200 nm. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure S-3 Optical image of one of the device. CVD nanopatterned graphene is place on top of Gold 
electrodes and the polymer used for the wedged transfer is dissolved in ethyl acetate. The insert present a SEM 
image of the nanopatterned graphene. The electrical measurements are done using four electrodes. 

===== Page 15 =====

 
15
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
Figure S-4 Typical conduntance/Gate Voltage characteristic of the 28% removed nanopatterned graphene. All our 
devices showed similar charateristics, indicating that our graphene has low condunctance and it is p-doped. It 
should be noticed that a 300 nm oxide has been used. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
‘ 
 
 
 
 
Figure S-5 Response of all samples after each injection of 100 ppb of NO2 at 175 oC. The response of all samples 
is reduced after each injection, but the nanopatterned devices show higher response.    
———————————— 
Address correspondence to Alberto Cagliani, alberto.cagliani@nanotech.dtu.dk; Peter Bøggild, peter.bøggild@nanotech.dtu.dk;    
