

===== Page 1 =====

1 
 
Self-aligned photonic defect microcavities with sitecontrolled quantum dots 
C.-W. Shih, 1 I. Limame, 1 C. C. Palekar, 1 A. Koulas-Simos, 1  
A. Kaganskiy, 1 P. Klenovský,2,3,b) S. Reitzenstein1,a) 
1Institut für Festkörperphysik, Technische Universität Berlin, 10623 Berlin, Germany 
2Department of Condensed Matter Physics, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Kotlářská 
267/2, 61137 Brno, Czech Republic 
3Czech Metrology Institute, Okružní 31, 63800 Brno, Czech Republic 
 
Correspondence: 
a) S. Reitzenstein, E-Mail: stephan.reitzenstein@physik.tu-berlin.de 
b) P. Klenovský, E-Mail: klenovsky@physics.muni.cz 
 
ABSTRACT: 
 
Despite the superiority in quantum properties, self-assembled semiconductor quantum dots 
face challenges in terms of scalable device integration because of their random growth positions, 
originating from the Stranski-Krastanov growth mode. Even with existing site-controlled growth 
techniques, for example, nanohole or buried stressor concepts, a further lithography and etching 
step with high spatial alignment requirements is necessary to accurately integrate QDs into the 
nanophotonic devices. Here, we report on the fabrication and characterization of strain-induced 
site-controlled microcavities where site-controlled quantum dots are positioned at the antinode of 
the optical mode field in a self-aligned manner without the need of any further nano-processing. 
We show that the Q-factor, mode volume, height, and the ellipticity of site-controlled 
microcavities can be tailored by the size of an integrated AlAs/Al2O3 buried stressor, with an 
opening ranging from 1 to 4 µm. Lasing signatures, including super-linear input-output response, 

===== Page 2 =====

2 
 
linewidth narrowing near threshold, and gain competition above threshold, are observed for a 3.6µm self-aligned cavity with a Q-factor of 18000. Furthermore, by waiving the rather complex 
lateral nano-structuring usually performed during the fabrication process of micropillar lasers and 
vertical-cavity surface emitting lasers, quasi-planar site-controlled cavities exhibit no detrimental 
effects of excitation power induced heating and thermal rollover. Our straightforward deterministic 
nanofabrication concept of high-quality quantum dot microcavities integrates seamlessly with the 
industrial-matured manufacturing process and the buried-stressor techniques, paving the way for 
exceptional scalability and straightforward manufacturing of high-β microlasers and bright 
quantum light sources.  
 
 
KEYWORDS site-controlled quantum dots, photonic microcavity, nanolasers, microlasers, 
vertical-cavity surface-emitting lasers, scalable quantum light sources, buried-stressor method 

===== Page 3 =====

3 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Semiconductor quantum dots (QDs), acting as artificial atoms, have demonstrated superiority 
in a variety of emerging quantum technologies due to their exceptional optical properties. These 
include adjustable emission wavelength covering from the visible range to telecommunication 
bands1, near-unity quantum efficiency2, on-demand single-photon and entangled photon pair 
emission3–5 for applications, for instance, in photonic quantum information technology6. 
Furthermore, self-assembled QDs enable the realization of cavity-enhanced low-threshold 
nanolasers with high-𝛽 factors7–9. 
Nevertheless, standard QDs face significant challenges in epitaxially controlling their spectral 
inhomogeneous broadening and spatial nucleation position due to the self-assembled nature of 
Stranski-Krastonov (SK) growth. These issues hinder the scalable integration of QDs into 
nanophotonic structures, which aim to enhance the light extraction, emission rate, and light-matter 
coupling for optimum device performance. Spectral matching of single QDs and the optical modes 
of microresonators has been successfully addressed with multiple techniques including 
piezoelectric strain tuning10–12, quantum confined Stark tuning13,14, and temperature tuning15. The 
spatial matching, on the other hand, is addressed through post-growth deterministic nanofabrication techniques like in-situ or marker-based optical and electron beam lithography (EBL)16–
18, pre-growth nanoholes patterning19, and the buried-stressor growth method20,21.  
The buried-stressor growth technique for site-controlled quantum dots (SCQDs) is particularly 
intriguing due to its ability to ensure high optical quality of the QDs thanks to the high-quality 
growth surface22,23, control of their position and local density24,25, and seamless integration within 
the industry-scale vertical cavity surface emitting lasers (VCSELs) process flow26. Photonic 
devices, such as single-photon sources (SPS)22–24,27 and micropillar lasers25 based on SCQDs have 

===== Page 4 =====

4 
 
been demonstrated. Nevertheless, the buried stressor method still requires a post-positionalignment step for the integration of SCQDs into photonic microcavities, which involves either 
marker-based or in-situ lithography28. The situation can become even more complex when the prepatterned markers are overgrown and covered by thick layers such as distributed Bragg reflectors 
(DBRs), which could obstruct the visual identification of the markers24,25. 
QDs are often integrated into micro- and nano-cavities with small mode volume to harness the 
cavity enhancement originating from, for instance, the Purcell-effect in the weak coupling regime 
of cavity quantum electrodynamics. Despite the achieved performance, for instance, photon 
extraction efficiency exceeding 65% in micropillar29,30 and 85% in circular Bragg grating (CBG) 
resonator configurations5, accompanying issues related to thermal management31,32 and 
detrimental surface defect states33 arise. Microcavities based on buried photonic defects, where no 
deep etching is required, can overcome these issues, and have recently caught significant interest 
from the nanophotonics community34–37. In such quasi-planar microcavities, usually the upper 
DBRs is shaped into micro- or nano-lenses to laterally confine light. 
In this study, we present an innovative type of quasi-planar site-controlled microcavity (SCM) 
created through the buried-stressor method. This SCM forms in a self-assembled manner during 
epitaxial growth and is spatially self-aligned to the SCQDs, eliminating the need for any postgrowth lithography. We take advantage of the fact that the strain induced by the buried stressor 
can modulate the growth rate and reshape the morphology of the sequential layers including the 
upper DBR, and can therefore form a photonic defect providing strong lateral mode confinement. 
Interestingly, as we show below microcavity properties such as Q-factor and mode volume can be 
tailored by the geometry of SCM, which is controlled by the size of the oxide aperture.   

===== Page 5 =====

5 
 
In the following, we first describe the fabrication and formation of SCMs and SCQDs by means 
of the buried-stressor method, together with a theoretical investigation on the strain and optical 
aspects of SCMs. Afterward, we present the experimental characterization of SCMs with pump 
power dependent micro-photoluminescence measurements on SCMs with different full width at 
half maximum (FWHM). Finally, we demonstrate lasing action of SCM, proving the high potential 
of our approach for nanophotonic applications. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Fabrication of SCMs  
A crucially appealing aspect of the SCM concept is the fact that the related device fabrication 
is not only synchronized but also spatially self-aligned with the buried-stressor growth of SCQDs. 
The fabrication process can be divided into three major steps as illustrated in Fig. 1. It starts with 
(a) the 1st-step metal-organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) growth of oxidation templates 
with bottom DBR, followed by (b) mesa etching and lateral wet-oxidation of the AlAs layer to 
create the oxide aperture, and (c) the 2nd-step overgrowth by InGaAs QDs and the top DBR. 
 

===== Page 6 =====

6 
 
Fig. 1: Illustration of the fabrication process of SCMs with an overall flowchart on the left. (a) 1st-step 
epitaxial growth of oxidation templates. (b) Square mesa etching and partial lateral wet-oxidation to form 
a size- and site-controlled oxide aperture. (c) 2nd-step overgrowth with InGaAs QDs and top DBRs. The 
reddish ellipse depicts the mode confined by the photonic defect cavity. (d) Optical microscope image of a 
site-controlled microcavity self-aligned to the site-controlled QDs.  
 
In our device structure discussed here, the bottom (top) DBR consists of 31 (27) alternating 
Al0.9Ga0.1As/GaAs layer pairs with quarter-wavelength thickness of 77.8/66.7 nm. The oxidation 
aperture in Fig. 1 consists of a 30-nm-thick AlAs oxidation layer embedded in two 50 nm thick 
Al0.9Ga0.1As layers for mechanical stabilization. In the growth of the oxidation templates, 50 nm 
of GaAs is deposited on the surface to encapsulate the AlAs layer to prevent surface oxidation, as 
illustrated in Fig. 1 (a). Square mesas with a side length of approximately 20 µm are then patterned 
via UV-lithography using a Hg lamp before being exposed to water vapor at 420 ℃, laterally 
oxidizing the AlAs layer as illustrated in Fig. 1 (b). The lateral oxidation process is interrupted 
before fully oxidizing the AlAs layer, leaving an opening which we denote as oxide aperture. 
Systematic control of the oxide aperture is enabled by varying the side length of the square mesas 
in 67-nm steps in conjunction with in-situ optical microscope monitoring of the oxidation process. 
In the consecutive 2nd-step overgrowth, the InGaAs QDs are preferentially grown above the 
tensile-strained aperture because of the surface strain modulated by the oxide aperture20,21. 
Interestingly, in our SCM concept we utilize the induced strain not only for spatially controlling 
the QD nucleation site but also the thickness of all the subsequent layers, including the top DBR. 
During the deposition process of the upper DBR, the growth rate and thickness is modulated in a 
spatially dependent manner, causing the mirror layers of the top DBR above the oxide aperture to 
curve into a lens shape as illustrated in Fig. 1 (c) along with a microscope image in Fig. 1 (d). 

===== Page 7 =====

7 
 
Noteworthy, this industry-compatible process without any further post-growth lithography is 
sufficient to fabricate the SCM devices with 3D mode confinement. 
 
Morphology of SCM and theoretical investigations 
To verify the strain-modulated growth of the upper DBR, we performed atomic force 
microscopy (AFM) to scan the surface morphology of SCMs with various oxide aperture sizes as 
presented in Fig. 2 (a)-(c).  Micro- and nano-lenses, isolated and surrounded by trenches, can be 
observed in the center of the mesas, i.e. directly above the oxide aperture. Please note that an 
ellipticity in the shape of SCM is observed, which can lift the degeneracy of the fundamental cavity 
mode and lead to a mode energy splitting as observed in bimodal micropillar lasers with 
asymmetric cross-section38,39.  
For a better understanding of the physics related to the results of the AFM measurements, we 
performed strain tensor calculations on the conceived structure depicted in Fig. 1 (c) using 
continuum elasticity theory 40–42. Since the AFM measurements provide information about relative 
height in different parts of the surface, we focused on the calculations on vertical strain, i.e., εzz 
strain component, where z is oriented along the [001] crystal direction. The parameter εzz then 
reveals the expected out-of-plane expansion or contraction of the crystal lattice towards the 
surface, which is then reflected by the surface morphology observed with AFM. The computed 
surface strain εzz in panels (d)-(f) highly resembles the AFM profiles in (a)-(c), with an increase of 
the εzz in the center, directly above the aperture, surrounded by diminishing εzz. Further details on 
our numerical calculations are provided in the Methods section. 
 

===== Page 8 =====

8 
 
 
Fig. 2: AFM images of SCMs with FWHM of (a) 1.1 µm, (b) 2.4 µm, and (c) 3.6 µm. Note that the FWHM 
here is determined by fitting a Gaussian around the central bump to represent the size of the SCMs, which 
is explained later in Fig. 3. We also show the computed surface distributions of the z component of the 
strain tensor εzz for aperture sizes of (d) 0.2 µm, (e) 1 µm, and (f) 2 µm. The range of magnitudes of εzz 
strain in (d)-(f) is between -0.1% (violet) to -0.02% (green). Note the relative increase of εzz above aperture 
(light blue) with respect to surrounding surface (violet) and correspondence to AFM images in (a)-(c). 
 
We further analyzed the peak-to-valley height of the lenses as a function of their FWHM, fitted 
with a Gaussian lineshape, as exemplified in Fig. 3 (a). Interestingly, the extracted height increases 
linearly with the FWHM as shown in Fig. 3 (b), which can potentially affect the strength of lateral 
confinement.  Due to the lack of circular symmetry of the SCMs (see AFM images in Fig. 2), their 
height and FWHM are estimated by averaging two orthogonal line profiles per AFM image. 
Meanwhile, the AFM surface characterization of the SCQDs layer underneath the top DBRs has 
revealed an additional abrupt small bump around 8 nm existing above the oxide aperture, which 
can be attributed to Indium migration during epitaxial growth43 (please see the Supplementary 
Information). Similar behavior is also observed in the theoretical surface strain calculations as 

===== Page 9 =====

9 
 
shown in Fig. 3 (c). Here, we compute the strain increase Δεzz at the center of the sample surface 
{see Fig. 2 (d)-(f)} with respect to the surrounding area with smallest εzz magnitude in analogy to 
Fig. 3 (a) and plot it as a function of the corresponding εzz FWHM. The high correspondence 
between the AFM profiles and the calculated demonstrates that the whole crystal lattice of the 
upper layers is distorted due to the buried stressor. Overall, the lens-shape morphology indicates 
that in our self-aligned fabrication concept not only the growth of the SCQDs, but also the cavity 
geometry can be tailored and controlled by the size and shape of the oxide aperture.  
 
Fig. 3: (a) Exemplary Gaussian fit of the AFM profile of the SCM presented in Fig. 2 (a). (b) The peak-tovalley height of SCM as a function of the FWHM. The presented SCM FWHM and height are averaged 
from two orthogonal line profiles. (c) The same as in (b) but derived from the εzz strain computed by the 
continuum elasticity theory. 
 
Figure 4 (a) presents a cross-section scanning-electron microscopy (SEM) image of a structure 
with a notably large oxide aperture. A kink, traced by an arrow, along the upper layers of the SEM 
image implies how the strain exerted by the AlAs/Al2O3 aperture propagates towards the surface. 
Due to the oxidation inhomogeneity and the lack of direct measurement of the absolute oxide 
aperture size after overgrowth, we deduce the oxide aperture diameter from the measured SCM 
FWHM as presented in Fig. 4 (b), assuming that the estimated propagation angle of 65° is 
independent of the oxide aperture size. This estimation is supported by the variation of the SCM 

===== Page 10 =====

10 
 
FWHM, which is equal to the nominal variation of the square mesa size in another more 
homogenous array. That array, however, has a smaller range of oxide aperture size variation, 
purely limited by the design of our UV-lithography mask as shown in Fig. 4 (c). Although there 
are a few outliers resulting from oxidation inhomogeneity, it is evident that the SCM FWHM can 
be controlled by the oxide aperture size, i.e., the mesa size.  
To gain more insights, we performed theory calculations of εzz strain, as presented in Fig. 4 (d). 
An excerpt of the simulated structure in (d) corresponds in all dimensions to that for experimental 
SEM in (a). The calculation clearly indicates that the magnitude of εzz in GaAs DBR layers 
increases from more (white) towards less (dark grey) compressive strain as one moves from the 
AlAs/Al2O3 oxide aperture towards the sample surface. Moreover, the magnitude of εzz strain 
increases in "cone" similarly as in our SEM image. However, the "kink" on the sample surface 
layer is related to a more gradual change of εzz as indicated by the inset arrow. Furthermore, in Fig. 
4 (e) we show the aperture diameter as a function of εzz FWHM obtained from our calculations. 
We find that the experimental and theoretical observations in (b) and (e) are in good qualitative 
agreement, and that the aperture diameter increases linearly with slopes of ≈1.7 and ≈2.0, 
respectively. However, there is a clear vertical offset between the curves by about 2 µm, which 
can be attributed to multiple effects: firstly, the surface AFM profiles account for the accumulation 
of the thickness changes in all the layers with each corresponding strain instead of only the surface 
strain as presented in (e); secondly, the experimental growth rate of GaAs and Al0.9Ga0.1As can also 
be modulated by the surface strain, leading to a more complex picture; thirdly, the lateral expansion 
of strain exerted by the aperture towards the sample surface would also distort the lateral 
dimension. 
 

===== Page 11 =====

11 
 
 
Fig. 4: (a) Cross-section SEM image of an SCM showing the propagation of the profile kink from the oxide 
aperture edge. (b) Estimated oxide aperture diameter as a function of SCM FWHM. (c) SCM FWHM as a 
function of the nominal mesa size increment defined by UV-lithography. The red linear line is a plot with 
a slope of 1 and y-intersection at 1.58 µm as a guide to the eye. (d) Cutout from the strain calculation 
corresponding to the SEM measurement (a). The gray DBR layers in (d) correspond to GaAs while the 
black ones to Al0.9Ga0.1As. The kink on the surface seen in (a) occurs as a gradual lateral change of εzz 
magnitude on the top sample surface layer and is indicated by an inset arrow in (d). (e) The same as in (b) 
but derived from εzz calculations. (f) Numerical simulation of the optical properties of an SCM with an 
aperture diameter of 2.5 µm. The opening of the oxide aperture is denoted as the SCQDs growth area, selfaligned to the antinode of the SCM mode field. 
 

===== Page 12 =====

12 
 
To investigate the optical properties of SCMs, optical simulations are carried out by means of 
a commercial software package, JCMsuite, based on the finite element method (FEM)44. The 
modeling of the structure is described in the Methods section. Figure 4 (f) shows the optical field 
of the fundamental cavity mode confined by an SCM with an exemplary aperture diameter of 2.5 
µm. The mode field extends out of the oxide aperture, resulting in a strong spatial overlap between 
the SCQDs and the mode field antinode, which maximizes the light confinement and the Purcell 
factors of the integrated QD emitters. Furthermore, the self-aligned overlap of SCQDs and modes 
is advantageous for improving the interaction between light and matter and for minimizing the 
absorption losses attributed to off-center QDs25. The simulation yields a theoretical cavity Q-factor 
of 144 000 and mode volume of 44.1 (𝜆/𝑛)3, which would result in a Purcell factor of 248 in 
the ideal case of perfect spatial and spectral alignment. We would, however, like to remark that 
the mode parameters of such buried photonic cavities are highly sensitive to the shape and 
morphology of the defect structure. For instance, a Gaussian-shape defect cavity would have a 
significantly higher Q-factor than a simple mesa defect cavity35. Therefore, without using nanoresolution imaging techniques such as the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) to accurately 
retrieve the layer structures for modeling, the presented simulation is expected to deviate from the 
experiments considerably. 
 
Optical characterization of SCMs  
We experimentally characterized the optical properties of SCMs using a microphotoluminescence (µPL) setup, where the sample is mounted in a He-flow cryostat at 20 K and 
optically pumped by a continuous wave (CW) laser at 785 nm followed by a spectrometer with a 
spectral resolution of 55 µeV. Figure 5 shows pump-power and polarization dependent 

===== Page 13 =====

13 
 
measurements of an SCM with a FWHM of 2.7 µm. Interestingly, two ensembles of optical modes 
can be observed in the µPL spectra, as shown in Fig. 5 (a) - (c). We attribute the presence of these 
two groups of modes to lateral light confinement arising from the strain-induced aperture cavity 
and the mesa cavity, respectively. Here, tight lateral light confinement in the strain-induced 
aperture cavity is caused by the curved layers of the top DBR directly above the oxide aperture, 
which we denote as SCM throughout the article. The overgrown etched square mesa with a length 
of 20 µm also leads to lateral mode confinement, similar to other previous etch-then-deposit 
approaches36,37. However, the associated mode volume is significantly larger, and as a result, 
compared to the aperture cavity the mesa cavity leads to smaller mode spacing as a sign of larger 
mode volume. Observed typical mode spacings of the aperture cavity and the mesa cavity are 110 meV and 0.2 meV, respectively. Noteworthy, the aperture cavity modes are spatially centered 
and self-aligned to the SCQDs. On the other hand, because of deviations of the structural 
geometry, the mesa cavity modes are typically located slightly off-center of the oxide aperture by 
more than 2 µm and are therefore spatially mismatched to the SCQDs. 
 
Fig. 5: Pump power and polarization dependent µPL measurements of an SCM with a FWHM of 2.7 µm. 
(a)-(c) µPL spectra of fundamental mode 1 collected at the center of the mesa at pump powers of 5.6 mW, 
1.9 mW, and 0.2 mW, respectively. The arrows indicate the aperture cavity modes. (d) The aperture mode 
energy fitted as a function of the polarization angle. The inset shows the spectra of the two orthogonal 
polarized fundamental modes. (e) Pump power dependent output intensity and linewidth of the aperture 

===== Page 14 =====

14 
 
cavity mode. The solid squares belong to the output power and the open circles belong to the linewidth. 
The arrows indicate the powers corresponding to (a)-(c). 
 
We would like to note that the strain-induced aperture cavity modes have a lower energy than 
the mesa cavity modes. That, on the first sight, surprising feature, can be attributed to the fact that 
the aperture cavity modes are confined in vertical direction by a larger thickness of the central 
cavity region above the oxide aperture. Here, the larger thickness is confirmed by our AFM 
measurements (see Fig. 2 and the Supplementary Information). Since the vertical mode 
confinement is stronger than the lateral one, small changes in the cavity thickness have a strong 
influence on the mode energy. The mentioned mode confinement effects are further verified by 1D numerical simulations with the transfer matrix method (TMM), investigating the mode energy 
on and off the oxidized area. The simulations show that a simple GaAs cavity just 8 nm thicker 
with a non-oxidized AlAs layer can redshift the mode energy by about 10 meV, fitting our 
experimental observation. Please see the Supplementary Information for more details on the TMM 
simulation. Furthermore, with polarization dependent measurements we find that the non-circular 
shape of the aperture cavity also lifts the degeneracy of the fundamental mode, leading to two 
orthogonally polarized modes with a spectral splitting of 20 µeV as shown in Fig. 5 (d). Such a 
phenomenon has also been observed in bimodal micropillar lasers with asymmetric crosssection38,39. These two mode components are marked as fundamental mode 1 and mode 2 in Fig. 
5 (e). Note that the mesa cavity modes also exhibit a high degree of linear polarization (please see 
the Supplementary Information). Without intentionally increasing the number of SCQDs, for 
instance, by stacking multiple layers of high density SCQDs43, most of the oxide apertures contain 
a low number of SCQDs. In fact, less than 20 SCQDs are formed for mesas with oxide aperture 
diameter in the range of 700 to 1400 nm in our sample25. As a result, most of the structures do not 

===== Page 15 =====

15 
 
exhibit nonlinear lasing signatures or power dependent linewidth narrowing due to the inadequate 
modal gain to surpass the laser threshold. These excitation power dependent properties are 
exemplified in Fig. 5 (e).  
To obtain a better understanding of the SCM’s optical properties, we systematically 
investigated SCMs with different FWHM. Figure 6 (a) shows the cavity Q-factor as a function of 
SCM FWHM evaluated at low pump power. The Q-factor increases from around 8000 to 18000 
when the FWHM increases from 2.0 µm to 3.6 µm.  Below 2 µm no clear trend in Q-factor is 
observed, potentially due to the complexity of the overall SCM shape accompanying the FWHM 
variation as shown in Fig. 2. The mode energy, on the other hand, strongly blueshifts with 
decreasing SCM FWHM as shown in Fig. 6 (b). That effect can be attributed to two factors: firstly, 
the mode radius decreases with decreasing SCM FWHM45; and secondly, the optical cavity 
thickness is also reduced as presented in Fig. 2.  Figure 6 (c) shows the 1st-2nd mode and 
fundamental mode splitting as a function of SCM FWHM. The increase of 1st-2nd mode splitting 
with decreasing SCM FWHM is a further experimental indicator that the mode is laterally confined 
and controlled by the SCM FWHM, and therefore by the size of the oxide aperture, with reference 
to the case of cylindrical Fabry-Pérot microcavities45. Note that below 2 µm FWHM, along with 
the large amount of blueshift and a 1st-2nd mode splitting exceeding 9 meV, the higher order modes 
of the SCMs are spectrally indistinguishable from the mesa cavity mode ensemble. Moreover, the 
splitting between the two orthogonally polarized fundamental modes is also affected by the SCM’s 
FWHM. As the SCM becomes smaller, the non-circular shape leads to a significant splitting of up 
to 163 µeV. The amount of splitting reduces with increasing SCM size, indicating the reduction of 
SCM ellipticity.  

===== Page 16 =====

16 
 
 
 
Fig. 6: Cavity (a) Q-factor, (b) mode energy, and (c) mode splitting as a function of the FWHM. Note that 
the SCM with a FWHM of 3.6 µm locates at another array than the others on the wafer, where the epitaxial 
inhomogeneity of the layer thickness dominates over the local effects and therefore shifts its mode energy 
out of the expected trend. 
 
The developed high-quality SCMs have high potential to act as QD microlasers with 
nanoengineered gain medium. To study lasing action of our SCMs, we selected a structure with 
3.6 µm FWHM where we expected many SCQDs. We estimate the number of SCQDs to surpass 
60, extrapolated from the previous study25, interacting with the optical field of the cavity to provide 
sufficient optical gain to overcome the losses. The excitation-power-dependent spectra are 
presented in Fig. 7 (a), where single mode lasing with the fundamental mode is observed. The 
SCM shows lasing signatures, including a characteristic S-shaped IO-curve in double-logarithmic 

===== Page 17 =====

17 
 
scale and linewidth narrowing near threshold reaching the resolution limit of 55 µeV of our 
spectrometer as depicted in Fig. 7 (b). Similar to in the case of bimodal micropillar lasers, gain 
competition is also presented between the two orthogonal components of the fundamental modes, 
where mode 1 is the superior component. By means of a simple laser rate equation assuming a 
simple two-level system46, we fitted the IO-curve of the superior lasing mode to extract a lasing 
threshold 𝑃𝑡ℎ of (6.7 ± 0.3) mW, defined as the threshold where the mean photon number reaches 
unity, and a spontaneous emission factor β of (4.2 ± 0.1) × 10−4.  
Another interesting feature of the SCM lasing performance is the excitation power dependence 
of the mode energy. Fitting the experimental emission spectra yields a pump power dependent 
blueshift of around 260 µeV in the range from 0.5 mW to 30 mW, as shown in Fig. 7 (c). This 
spectral shift can be attributed to the carrier-induced refractive index change, known as plasma 
effects47,48. We emphasize that the DBRs in the structure consist of Al0.9Ga0.1As and GaAs, which 
can optically absorb the pump laser at 785 nm, leading to low pump power conversion efficiency32. 
In the case of deeply etched structures, such as micropillar lasers, this usually leads to heating of 
the devices, which induces undesired thermal effects such as a redshift of the mode energy31,32. 
Noteworthy, such heating effects are not observed in our quasi-planar SCM, where the heat can be 
effectively dissipated with the non-isolated surroundings.  

===== Page 18 =====

18 
 
 
 
Fig. 7: Pump power dependent measurement of a SCM with 3.6 µm FWHM. (a) The pump power dependent 
spectra with normalized intensity. (b) IO-curve and linewidth of both components of the fundamental 
modes. The solid markers represent the output powers, whereas the empty markers denote the linewidths. 
(c) The pump power dependent mode energy.  
 
Intriguingly, all the presented cavity Q-factors of SCMs are comparable or even higher than 
for the case of free-standing micropillars with a diameter of 5.2 µm and slightly larger mode 
volume on the same wafer, where the achieved cavity Q-factor is lower than 10000 25. The lasing 
threshold (6.7 ± 0.3) mW of the SCM microlaser is similar to the values determined for 5.2-µmdiameter micropillar lasers, where the achieved lasing threshold ranges from 5 to 9 mW 25. This 
proves the high quality of our SCMs and their potential for high-performance quantum light 
sources and micro-lasers applications. We would like to note that not only the SCM mode energy 

===== Page 19 =====

19 
 
but also the SCQDs emission energy are strongly influenced by the oxide aperture43, which can 
lead to a spectral mismatch between the two. Together with the strongly absorbing 
GaAs/Al0.9Ga0.1As DBRs and the low number of SCQDs in most of the structures, the lasing action 
is limited. However, with further efforts in optimizing all the aforementioned aspects, including 
stacked layers of SCQDs and replacing the DBRs with low-absorbing Al0.2Ga0.8As/Al0.9Ga0.1As 
ones32,43, we expect the SCM lasers’ performance in terms of Pth and β can be hugely improved.   
 
 
CONCLUSIONS 
In conclusion, we showed that by means of the buried-stressor growth method, not only 
SCQDs are preferably nucleating above the oxide aperture, but also SCMs are formed self-aligned 
to the SCQDs resulting from the strain-induced growth-rate modulation in the upper DBR. The 
latter leads to a tight 3-D mode confinement with high cavity Q-factor and small mode volume 
without further post-growth lithography. Our experimental characterization reveals that the optical 
properties of SCMs such as Q-factor, mode energy, and mode volume are strongly influenced by 
the size of the oxide aperture. Lasing, including a characteristic S-shaped I/O-curve in doublelogarithmic scale and linewidth narrowing, was achieved for an SCM with a Q-factor of 18000 
and a rather large FWHM of 3.6 µm, which has enough modal gain provided by SCQDs to 
overcome the optical losses. Additionally, no thermal-induced redshift of the mode energy is 
observed for the whole pump power range, highlighting the effectiveness of thermal dissipation in 
such quasi-planar structures. 
Thanks to the fact that the formation of SCMs is induced by the buried stressor, no nanoscale 
lithography technique such as EBL is required in the fabrication process. In fact, UV-lithography 

===== Page 20 =====

20 
 
as a highly scalable and cost-effective lithography technique is sufficient to create these 
microcavities with 3D mode confinement. The SCM concept is well aligned with the established 
manufacturing processes of VCSELs and SCQDs, enabling an immediately applicable approach 
for the production of scalable and high-quality nanophotonic devices utilizing QDs. 
 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
Structural modeling of SCM for optical simulation 
The difficulties of theoretically investigating the SCMs’ optical performances lie in the precise 
structural modeling of the SCM topology. It has been shown that for such photonic defect cavities, 
the cavity Q-factor and the mode volume are highly sensitive to the shape and size of the defects 
buried underneath the top DBRs35. In this work, we model the structures in the following way to 
match the available AFM and SEM profile: (a) We assume rotational symmetry in the simulation 
in order to have as simple a model as possible, but of course never simpler. (b) A small Gaussian 
bump with a height of 8 nm and a standard deviation of oxide aperture radius is introduced in the 
GaAs cavity layer before the top DBR as evidenced by the AFM profile on the SCQDs layer. 
Please see the Supplementary Information for the AFM profile on the SCQDs layer. (c) We modify 
the thickness of each top DBR according to an inverse Gaussian function: t(r) = T×(1–A×G(r, r0)), 
where t(r) is the modulated thickness as a function of the radial position, T is the nominal thickness 
of each layer, A=0.12 modifies the strength to match the peak-to-valley height from the surface 
AFM profile, and G is a normalized Gaussian function centered at r0 with a standard deviation of 
r0/4. For each layer, we let r0 to propagate at 65° angle from the edge of the oxide aperture 
according to the SEM image. 
 

===== Page 21 =====

21 
 
Numerical modeling of elastic strain 
In this work, we used a continuum elasticity approach for modeling of the elastic strain in the 
structure using software Nextnano++40. The method starts with the definition of the simulated 
structure, which was in our case taken to be exactly the same as in Fig. 1 (c) including all 
dimensions therein. Each material in the structure is thereafter described by the corresponding 
elastic parameters from Nextnano++ software database. In case of alloys, a linear interpolation 
between parameters for constituent materials was employed. The elastic strain energy in the whole 
simulated structure was thereafter minimized on the finite difference grid. We note that the finite 
difference method was used in favor of potentially more precise atomistic approaches41,49 because 
of the considerably large dimensions of the simulated structure, being on the order of several µm 
in each spatial extension. 
 
Optical measurements 
We investigate the structures with a standard µPL setup. The sample is mounted in a He-flow 
cryostat operating at 20 K, optically excited by a CW laser at 785 nm with a microscope objective 
of 0.4 numerical aperture to focus the laser beam into a small spot around 4 µm2 and 
simultaneously collect the sample emission. In the detection path, a rotatable lambda-half wave 
plate followed by a fixed linear polarizer are installed before the spectrometer to resolve the 
polarization dependency.  
 
Laser rate equations model based on a two-level system 

===== Page 22 =====

22 
 
To qualitatively characterize the lasing threshold 𝑃𝑡ℎ and the β-factor of the SCM laser, a simple 
laser rate equation model based on a two-level system is applied46. By solving the laser rate 
equations, the optical pump power Ppump can be expressed as a function of the output power Pout: 
𝑃𝑝𝑢𝑚𝑝(𝐴, 𝐵, 𝛽, 𝜉) = 𝐴
𝛾
𝛽[
𝐵𝑃𝑜𝑢𝑡
1+𝐵𝑃𝑜𝑢𝑡(1 + 𝜉)(1 + 𝐵𝑃𝑜𝑢𝑡) −𝛽𝜉𝐵𝑃𝑜𝑢𝑡], 
where A is the pump scaling parameter, B is the output scaling parameter linking the intracavity 
photon number to the measured output power, 𝜉= 𝑛0𝛽/𝛾𝜏𝑠𝑝 is a dimensionless factor with 𝑛0 the 
exciton number at transparency threshold, 𝜏𝑠𝑝 the spontaneous emission rate, 𝛾 the cavity decay 
rate, and 𝛽 the spontaneous emission factor. On the other hand, 𝑃𝑡ℎ defined as the pump power 
when the mean photon number reaches unity and is expressed by: 
𝑃𝑡ℎ= 𝐴(𝜉(1 −𝛽) + 1 + 𝛽)𝛾/2𝛽 
In the fit, we additionally take 𝜏𝑠𝑝 = 1 ns and 𝑛0 = 2900 as have been previously reported for QD 
micropillar lasers50 to avoid the degeneracy of the fitting parameters.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work received funding from the German Research Foundation (Re2974/20-1, Re2974/21-1) 
and the Volkswagen Foundation (NeuroQNet II) and from the European Research Council under 
the European Union’s Seventh Framework ERC Grant Agreement No. 615613. Furthermore, we 
acknowledge the projects SEQUME (20FUN05) and QADeT (20IND05) from the EMPIR 
program cofinanced by the Participating States and from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation program. P. K. was partly funded by the Institutional Subsidy for the 
Long-Term Conceptual Development of a Research Organization granted to the Czech Metrology 
Institute by the Ministry of Industry and Trade of the Czech Republic and by the project Quantum 
Materials for applications in sustainable technologies, CZ.02.01.01/00/22_008/0004572. In 

===== Page 23 =====

23 
 
addition, we thank K. Schatke, R. Schmidt, and R. Linke for the technical support on epitaxy and 
cleanroom fabrication. We also acknowledge the members of our research groups for fostering a 
supportive and collaborative environment, especially, K. Gaur, J. Große, and T. Müller.  
CONFLICT OF INTEREST 
The authors declare no conflict of interest. 
DATA AVAILABILITY 
Data underlying the results presented in this paper may be obtained from the authors upon 
reasonable request. 
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS 
C.-W. S. conducted the measurements, analysis, and optical simulations. C.-W. S. and S. R. wrote 
the manuscript. I. L. provided preliminary results and concept. C. C. P. and A. K.-S. assisted the 
measurements. A. K. fabricated the sample. P. K. performed the strain simulation, included the 
corresponding theory, and revised the manuscript. S. R. acquired funding and supervised the 
project. 
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION 
Supplementary information accompanies the manuscript on the Light: Science & Applications 
website (http://www.nature.com/lsa). 
REFERENCES 
1. 
Sittig, R. et al. Thin-film InGaAs metamorphic buffer for telecom C-band InAs quantum dots and 
optical resonators on GaAs platform. Nanophotonics 11, 1109–1116 (2022). 
2. 
Große, J., Mrowiński, P., Srocka, N. & Reitzenstein, S. Quantum efficiency and oscillator strength 
of InGaAs quantum dots for single-photon sources emitting in the telecommunication O-band. 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 119, 061103 (2021). 

===== Page 24 =====

24 
 
3. 
Kolatschek, S. et al. Bright Purcell Enhanced Single-Photon Source in the Telecom O-Band Based 
on a Quantum Dot in a Circular Bragg Grating. Nano Lett. 21, 7740–7745 (2021). 
4. 
Shih, C.-W., Rodt, S. & Reitzenstein, S. Universal design method for bright quantum light sources 
based on circular Bragg grating cavities. Opt. Express 31, 35552 (2023). 
5. 
Liu, J. et al. A solid-state source of strongly entangled photon pairs with high brightness and 
indistinguishability. Nat. Nanotechnol. 14, 586–593 (2019). 
6. 
Heindel, T., Kim, J.-H., Gregersen, N., Rastelli, A. & Reitzenstein, S. Quantum dots for photonic 
quantum information technology. Adv. Opt. and Photonics 15, 613 (2023). 
7. 
Ota, Y., Kakuda, M., Watanabe, K., Iwamoto, S. & Arakawa, Y. Thresholdless quantum dot 
nanolaser. Opt. Express 25, 19981 (2017). 
8. 
Deng, H., Lippi, G. L., Mørk, J., Wiersig, J. & Reitzenstein, S. Physics and Applications of High‐
β Micro‐ and Nanolasers. Adv. Opt. Mater 9, 2100415 (2021). 
9. 
Kreinberg, S. et al. Emission from quantum-dot high-ß microcavities: Transition from spontaneous 
emission to lasing and the effects of superradiant emitter coupling. Light Sci. Appl. 6, e17030 
(2017). 
10. 
Zhang, J. et al. High yield and ultrafast sources of electrically triggered entangled-photon pairs 
based on strain-tunable quantum dots. Nat. Commun. 6, 10067 (2015). 
11. 
Ding, F. et al. Tuning the exciton binding energies in single self-assembled InGaAs/GaAs quantum 
dots by piezoelectric-induced biaxial stress. Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 067405 (2010). 
12. 
Aberl, J. et al. Inversion of the exciton built-in dipole moment in In(Ga)As quantum dots via 
nonlinear piezoelectric effect. Phys. Rev. B 96, 045414 (2017). 
13. 
Bennett, A. J. et al. Giant Stark effect in the emission of single semiconductor quantum dots. Appl. 
Phys. Lett. 97, 031104 (2010). 

===== Page 25 =====

25 
 
14. 
Huang, H. et al. Electric field induced tuning of electronic correlation in weakly confining 
quantum dots. Phys. Rev. B 104, 165401 (2021). 
15. 
Reithmaier, J. P. et al. Strong coupling in a single quantum dot–semiconductor microcavity 
system. Nature 432, 197–200 (2004). 
16. 
Sapienza, L., Davanço, M., Badolato, A. & Srinivasan, K. Nanoscale optical positioning of single 
quantum dots for bright and pure single-photon emission. Nat. Commun. 6, 7833 (2015). 
17. 
Rodt, S. & Reitzenstein, S. High-performance deterministic in situ electron-beam lithography 
enabled by cathodoluminescence spectroscopy. Nano Express 2, 014007 (2021). 
18. 
Dousse, A. et al. Controlled light-matter coupling for a single quantum dot embedded in a pillar 
microcavity using far-field optical lithography. Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 267404 (2008). 
19. 
Nakamura, Y. et al. Vertical alignment of laterally ordered InAs and InGaAs quantum dot arrays 
on patterned (0 0 1) GaAs substrates. J. Cryst. Growth 242, 339–344 (2002). 
20. 
Strittmatter, A. et al. Lateral positioning of InGaAs quantum dots using a buried stressor. Appl. 
Phys. Lett. 100, 093111 (2012). 
21. 
Strittmatter, A. et al. Site-controlled quantum dot growth on buried oxide stressor layers. Phys. 
Status Solidi A 209, 2411–2420 (2012). 
22. 
Strauß, M. et al. Resonance fluorescence of a site-controlled quantum dot realized by the buriedstressor growth technique. Appl. Phys. Lett. 110, 111101 (2017). 
23. 
Große, J., von Helversen, M., Koulas-Simos, A., Hermann, M. & Reitzenstein, S. Development of 
site-controlled quantum dot arrays acting as scalable sources of indistinguishable photons. APL 
Photonics 5, 096107 (2020). 
24. 
Kaganskiy, A. et al. Micropillars with a controlled number of site-controlled quantum dots. Appl. 
Phys. Lett. 112, 071101 (2018). 

===== Page 26 =====

26 
 
25. 
Kaganskiy, A., Kreinberg, S., Porte, X. & Reitzenstein, S. Micropillar lasers with site-controlled 
quantum dots as active medium. Optica 6, 404 (2019). 
26. 
Huffaker, D. L., Deppe, D. G., Kumar, K. & Rogers, T. J. Native-oxide defined ring contact for 
low threshold vertical-cavity lasers. Appl. Phys. Lett. 65, 97–99 (1994). 
27. 
Unrau, W. et al. Electrically driven single photon source based on a site-controlled quantum dot 
with self-aligned current injection. Appl. Phys. Lett. 101, 211119 (2012). 
28. 
Kaganskiy, A. et al. Enhancing the photon-extraction efficiency of site-controlled quantum dots 
by deterministically fabricated microlenses. Opt. Commun. 413, 162–166 (2018). 
29. 
Unsleber, S. et al. Highly indistinguishable on-demand resonance fluorescence photons from a 
deterministic quantum dot micropillar device with 74% extraction efficiency. Opt Express 24, 
8539 (2016). 
30. 
Somaschi, N. et al. Near-optimal single-photon sources in the solid state. Nat Photonics 10, 340–
345 (2016). 
31. 
Jagsch, S. T. et al. A quantum optical study of thresholdless lasing features in high-β nitride 
nanobeam cavities. Nat. Commun. 9, 564 (2018). 
32. 
Shih, C.-W. et al. Low-threshold lasing of optically pumped micropillar lasers with 
Al0.2Ga0.8As/Al0.9Ga0.1As distributed Bragg reflectors. Appl. Phys. Lett. 122, 151111 (2023). 
33. 
Liu, J. et al. Single self-assembled InAs/GaA quantum dots in photonic nanostructures: the role of 
nanofabrication. Phys. Rev. Appl. 9, 064019 (2018). 
34. 
Mai, L. et al. Integrated vertical microcavity using a nano-scale deformation for strong lateral 
confinement. Appl. Phys. Lett. 103, 243305 (2013). 
35. 
Ding, F., Stöferle, T., Mai, L., Knoll, A. & Mahrt, R. F. Vertical microcavities with high Q and 
strong lateral mode confinement. Phys. Rev. B 87, 161116 (2013). 

===== Page 27 =====

27 
 
36. 
Engel, L. et al. Purcell enhanced single-photon emission from a quantum dot coupled to a truncated 
Gaussian microcavity. Appl. Phys. Lett. 122, 043503 (2023). 
37. 
Gaur, K. et al. High-β lasing in photonic-defect semiconductor-dielectric hybrid microresonators 
with embedded InGaAs quantum dots. Preprint at arXiv:2309.10936 (2023). 
38. 
Gies, C. & Stephan Reitzenstein. Quantum-Dot Micropillar Lasers. Semicond. Sci. Technol. 34, 
073001 (2019). 
39. 
Heermeier, N. et al. Spin-Lasing in Bimodal Quantum Dot Micropillar Cavities. Laser Photon. 
Rev. 16, 2100585 (2022). 
40. 
Birner, S. et al. nextnano: General Purpose 3-D Simulations. IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 54, 
2137–2142 (2007). 
41. 
Mittelstädt, A., Schliwa, A. & Klenovský, P. Modeling electronic and optical properties of III–V 
quantum dots—selected recent developments. Light Sci. Appl. 11, 17 (2022). 
42. 
Yuan, X. et al. GaAs quantum dots under quasiuniaxial stress: Experiment and theory. Phys. Rev. 
B 107, 235412 (2023). 
43. 
Limame, I. et al. Epitaxial growth and characterization of multi-layer site-controlled InGaAs 
quantum dots based on the buried stressor method. Preprint at arXiv:2311.05777 (2023). 
44. 
Burger, S., Zschiedrich, L., Pomplun, J. & Schmidt, F. JCMsuite: An Adaptive FEM Solver for 
Precise Simulations in Nano-Optics. in Integrated Photonics and Nanophotonics Research and 
Applications ITuE4 (OSA, 2008). 
45. 
Panzarini, G. & Andreani, L. C. Quantum theory of exciton polaritons in cylindrical semiconductor 
microcavities. Phys. Rev. B 60, 16799–16806 (1999). 
46. 
Björk, G. & Yamamoto, Y. Analysis of Semiconductor Microcavity Lasers Using Rate Equations. 
IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 27, 2386–2396 (1991). 

===== Page 28 =====

28 
 
47. 
Bennett, B. R., Soref, R. A. & Alamo, J. A. Del. Carrier-Induced Change in Refractive GaAs, and 
InGaAsP. IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 26, 113–122 (1990). 
48. 
Huang, H. C., Yee, S. & Soma, M. The carrier effects on the change of refractive index for n-type 
GaAs at λ = 1.06, 1.3, and 1.55 μm. J. Appl. Phys. 67, 1497–1503 (1990). 
49. 
LAMMPS molecular dynamics simulator. Available at: https://www.lammps.org/#gsc.tab=0. 
(Accessed: 7th November 2023). 
50. 
Andreoli, L. et al. Optical pumping of quantum dot micropillar lasers. Opt. Express 29, 9084 
(2021). 
  

===== Page 29 =====

1 
 
Supplementary Information 
Self-aligned photonic defect microcavities with sitecontrolled quantum dots 
C.-W. Shih, 1 I. Limame, 1 C. C. Palekar, 1 A. Koulas-Simos, 1  
A. Kaganskiy, 1 P. Klenovský,2,3,b) S. Reitzenstein1,a) 
1Institut für Festkörperphysik, Technische Universität Berlin, 10623 Berlin, Germany 
2Department of Condensed Matter Physics, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Kotlářská 
267/2, 61137 Brno, Czech Republic 
3Czech Metrology Institute, Okružní 31, 63800 Brno, Czech Republic 
 
Correspondence: 
a) S. Reitzenstein, E-Mail: stephan.reitzenstein@physik.tu-berlin.de 
b) P. Klenovský, E-Mail: klenovsky@physics.muni.cz 
 
1. AFM profiles on the layer of SCQDs 
Atomic force microscopy (AFM) scans are performed on SCQDs of a reference sample 
without the growth of top DBR. A bump around 8 nm is observed on most of the structures 
despite the surface morphology can change depending on the strain and the size of the oxide 
aperture as depicted in Fig. S1, originating potentially from Indium migration1. This bump acts 
as a monolithically integrated photonic defect after the growth of the top DBR and provides 
lateral mode confinement for vertical emitting photonic devices2.  

===== Page 30 =====

2 
 
 
Fig. S1: (a) AFM profile of a structure with an oxide aperture diameter of 1.2 µm. (b) Two orthogonal line 
profiles of the AFM image indicated as the white lines in (a). 
2. Optical simulation on and off the oxide area 
In the main text, we describe that the two ensembles of photonic modes, including the 
aperture cavity modes and the mesa cavity modes, are observed in different spectral ranges. 
The aperture cavities are located directly above the center of the mesa, on the non-oxidized 
area. As a result, they contain a thicker optical cavity as proven by the AFM profiles and a 
non-oxidized AlAs layer with higher refractive index. That leads to an experimental redshift 
of the aperture cavity modes compared to the mesa cavity modes, the mode area of which 
consists of a large portion of the oxidized part. 
To investigate those effects, we performed a 1-D optical simulation with transfer matrix 
method to verify the mode energy shift caused by the layer change on and off the oxidizedarea. Fig. S2 shows the reflectance of the structure as a function of the wavelength, where the 
dips indicate the emission wavelength. A redshift of approximately 6.9 nm (9.9 meV) is 
observed in the simulations, which aligns with the experimental observations, specifically in 
Fig. 5 (a)-(c) of the main manuscript.  

===== Page 31 =====

3 
 
 
Fig. S2: Reflectance as a function of wavelength on and off the oxidized area. The reflectance dips indicate 
the emission wavelength of the fundamental cavity mode.  
3. Optical measurements of mesa cavity modes 
The optical measurements of a mesa cavity mode, where the contained SCM has a FWHM 
of 1.3 μm, are presented. Figure S3 (a) shows an exemplary emission spectrum of the mesa 
cavity mode with cavity Q-factor around 21000 at a pump power of 1 mW. With increasing 
excitation power, the mesa cavity mode enters the lasing regime, as we discuss below. Figure 
S3 (b) presents the polarization measurements above the lasing threshold, where the integrated 
intensity of the emission is plotted against the polarization angle, at a pump power of 40 mW. 
The mode exhibits a high degree of linearly. Figure S3 (c) and (d) present the excitation-power 
dependent measurements. Typical lasing characteristics including linewidth narrowing and a 
characteristic S-shaped IO-curve in double-logarithmic scale are observed. Similar to the 
aperture cavity modes, the effects of heating are absent, evidenced by the monotonous blueshift 
of the mode energy caused by plasma effects. By fitting using the laser rate equation, we extract 
 

===== Page 32 =====

4 
 
a lasing threshold Pth of (8.07 ± 0.43) mW and a β-factor of (2.31 ± 0.08) × 10-5. Noteworthy, 
the β-factor of mesa cavity modes is one order of magnitude smaller than the one of the aperture 
cavity modes presented in the main manuscript, which can be attributed to a larger mode 
volume and spatial mismatch of the SCQDs to the cavity mode antinode. 
 
Fig. S3: Optical properties of a mesa cavity mode of an SCM with a FWHM of 1.3 μm. (a) Mode spectra 
of both polarization-orthogonal fundamental components at a pump power of 1 mW. (b)  The integrated 
intensity as a function of the polarization angle components at a pump power of 40 mW above the lasing 
threshold. The mode is strongly linearly polarized according to the superior mode. (c) The IO curve and the 
associated mode linewidths. (d) The pump-power dependent mode energy.  
 
References 
   
   
   
   

===== Page 33 =====

5 
 
1. 
Limame, I. et al. Epitaxial growth and characterization of multi-layer site-controlled 
InGaAs quantum dots based on the buried stressor method. Preprint at arXiv:2311.05777 
(2023). 
2. 
Ding, F., Stöferle, T., Mai, L., Knoll, A. & Mahrt, R. F. Vertical microcavities with high Q 
and strong lateral mode confinement. Phys. Rev. B 87, 161116 (2013). 
  
