

===== Page 1 =====

Utilizing (Al,Ga)2O3/Ga2O3 superlattices to measure cation vacancy
diffusion and vacancy-concentration-dependent diffusion of Al, Sn, and Fe
in β-Ga2O3
Nathan D. Rock,1 Haobo Yang,1 Brian Eisner,1 Aviva Levin,1 Arkka Bhattacharyya,2, 3 Sriram Krishnamoorthy,2, 3
Praneeth Ranga,2 Michael A Walker,4 Larry Wang,5 Ming Kit Cheng,5 Wei Zhao,5 and Michael A. Scarpulla1, 2
1)Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112,
USA
2)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112,
USA
3)Materials Department, University of California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA 93106,
USA
4)Department of Metallurgical and Materials Engineering, Colorado School of Mines,Golden CO, 80401,
USA
5)Eurofins EAG Material Science, Sunnyvale, CA, 94086, USA
(*Electronic mail: mike.scarpulla@utah.edu)
(Dated: 27 March 2024)
Diffusion of native defects such as vacancies and their interactions with impurities are fundamental in semiconductor
crystal growth, device processing, and long-term aging of equilibration and transient diffusion of vacancies are rarely
investigated. We used (AlxGa1−x)2O3/Ga2O3 superlattices (SLs) to detect and analyze transient diffusion of cation
vacancies during annealing in O2 at 1000−1100◦C. Using a novel finite difference scheme for the diffusion equation
with time- and space-varying diffusion constant, we extract diffusion constants for Al, Fe, and cation vacancies under
the given conditions, including the vacancy concentration dependence for Al. In the case of SLs grown on Sn-doped
β −Ga2O3 (010) substrates, gradients observed in the extent of Al diffusion indicate that vacancies present in the
substrate transiently diffuse through the SLs, interacting with Sn as it also diffuses. In the case of SLs grown on
(010) Fe-doped substrates, the Al diffusion is uniform through the SLs, indicating a depth-uniform concentration of
vacancies. We find no evidence in either case for the introduction of VGa from the free surface at rates sufficient to affect
Al diffusion down to ppm concentrations, which has important bearing on the validity of typically-made assumptions
of vacancy equilibration. Additionally, we show that unintentional impurities in Sn-doped Ga2O3 such as Fe, Ni, Mn,
Cu, and Li also diffuse towards the surface and accumulate. Many of these likely have fast interstitial diffusion modes
capable of destabilizing devices over time, thus highlighting the importance of controlling unintentional impurities in
β −Ga2O3 wafers.
I.
INTRODUCTION
β-Ga2O3 is an ultra-wide band gap (UWBG) semiconductor with potential for superior performance in power electronics as well as in solar blind UV photodetectors and in transparent contacts for photovoltaics.1–3. To further advance this
technology, a thorough understanding of the defects present
and their transport is needed including during single crystal
growth, epitaxial thin film growth, and during other fabrication steps.
Many groups have observed an increase in resistivity of
n-type β-Ga2O3 after O2 annealing4. This formation of an
insulating surface layer allows facile formation of UV photodetectors.
This phenomenon was originally attributed to
the elimination of VO which were presumed to act as shallow donors, before refined DFT calculations indicated that VO
was a deep donor and thus could not contribute directly to
n-type conductivity5. Oshima, et al. documented the √t kinetics of the insulating layer thickness formed during O2 annealing and demonstrated that an SiO2 cap could prevent it6.
This indicates that direct exposure of the Ga2O3 surface to
oxygen does control the compensation of n-type conductivity
in some way. Meanwhile positron annihilation experiments
have demonstrated the presence of VGa in both bulk crystals
and thin films7,8, and that increases in their numbers and or
charge states accompany O2 annealing , which makes them a
strong candidate for n-type compensation9,10. Many mechanisms, involving oxygen, VGa, VO, and n-type dopants (Sn and
Si) have been proposed, including those which involve defect
complexes instead of bare VGa and VO11–14. Studying the diffusion of VGa should elucidate what mechanisms were at play,
however vacancies are much more difficult to observe directly
than e.g. impurity atoms.
With the exception of the direct interstitial impurity mechanism, self- and tracer-diffusion is mediated by native defects such as vacancies or interstitials.3,15–19. Modern computation and experiment have established Ga vacancies and
their complexes as the most plentiful native defects in n-type
β-Ga2O3. Substitutional isovalent alloying cations in oxides
having ionic radii not significantly less than the host atom –
e.g. Al in Ga2O3 – should exhibit primarily vacancy-mediated
mechanisms under oxygen-rich conditions favoring cation vacancies and suppressing cation interstitials. Interstitial mediated mechanisms may be possible under metal-rich conditions favoring cation interstitials.
The local diffusion constant of isotopic or chemical tracers is proportional to the local
concentration of mediating native defects. Thus for vacancyarXiv:2403.17298v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  26 Mar 2024

===== Page 2 =====

2
hopping the tracer diffusion “constant” can vary in space and
time with the concentration of mediating vacancies and different crystals may exhibit different diffusion constants by
virtue of their vacancy content. This in turn is affected by
dopant impurities through Fermi level effects and their thermal and chemical history. For dopant ions that control the local Fermi level, local equilibrium of native defects can result
in that dopant’s diffusion constant being dependent on its own
concentration20–23. The most general microscopic formulation of tracer diffusion problems is coupled reaction-diffusion
of defects and complexes wherein the different tracer-native
defect complexes have different diffusion coefficients than
the isolated species24,25. The fraction of time, or population
fraction, of complexes relates to the binding energy and connects to the correlation coefficient of random walk theory19.
Interestingly, our assumption that the Al impurity diffusion
constant in Fick’s laws is proportional to vacancy concentration is not on its face identical to introducing non-zero but
constant off-diagonal coefficients within Onsager’s transport
formalism26.
Herein, isothermally anneal superlattices of isovalent Al
tracer concentration spikes in β-Ga2O3 to investigate the interdiffusion of Al, diffusion of cation vacancies, and diffusion of Fe or Sn impurities. Commonly it is assumed (and
in careful experiments, ensured) that diffusion-mediating native defects equilibriate with local impurity concentrations
rapidly compared to the experimental timescale. Rapid equilibration can be assumed in samples containing dense sources
and sinks, however in high-perfection crystals like those in
this study, equilibration may be much slower and limited by
injection at or transport from remote surfaces. Experiments
in which native defect processes occur on similar timescales
to tracer or impurity diffusion translate to time- and spacevarying vacancy concentrations and thus impurity diffusion
constants.
Herein, Al diffusion in superlattices (SLs) epitaxially
grown on Fe substrates occurs with at least spatially-uniform
vacancy density, while in samples grown on Sn-doped wafers
we show strong evidence for transient diffusion of cation vacancies out of the substrate. Using a novel modification of the
Crank-Nicholsen finite differences scheme, we infer the diffusion of the vacancies mediating Al diffusion. The final Al
profiles in this work record a weighted time average of [VGa] at
each depth and the DVGa we extract should also be understood
as a time-averaged value in the presence of certain Sn (donor)
or Fe (acceptor) concentrations and small amounts of Al. Our
experiments thus set lower bounds on the true DVGa and Ga
self-diffusion constant for single crystalline β-Ga2O3. We
determine the diffusion constants for Al including its dependence on local VGa concentration, for VGa (likely in the form
of SnGa −VGa complexes), and for Fe under conditions of low
vacancy concentration and low electron density. Finally, we
surreptitiously discovered that many other cation species such
as Fe, Mn, Ni, Li, and Cu also diffused from the Sn-doped
substrates and accumulated near the free surface.
II.
EXPERIMENTAL AND NUMERICAL METHODS
Superlattices (SLs) consisting of 6 or 9 alternating layers
of 200 nm unintentionally doped (UID) β-Ga2O3 and 10-15
nm Al2xGa2(1−x)O3 (AlGO) where x ∼= 0.05. were epitaxially
grown using organometallic vapor phase epitaxy (OMVPE)
in an Agnitron Agilis 100 system on (010) Sn or Fe doped
β-Ga2O3 substrates obtained from Novel Crystal Technology
(NCT). The vendor reports Fe or Sn concentrations in the mid
1018cm−3, and etch pits from nanovoids and dislocations are
< 105/cm2. The lowest practical Al concentration of ≈5 at.%
was used and layers below the critical thickness were used in
order to prevent introduction of misfit dislocations. SLs always began and ended with 200 nm Ga2O3 spacers. UID layers grown under the same conditions exhibit n-type doping in
the low 1016/cm3 range. Annealing was carried out for times
between 2 and 80 hours with samples face up in a quartz tube
furnace in 1 atm flowing O2 after acid cleaning the tube and
the quartz or sapphire plates on which samples sat. During annealing, temperature was ramped at 10◦C/min and then held
constant for the indicated time, after which, it was allowed to
freely return to room temperature.
Dynamic secondary ion mass spectroscopy (d-SIMS) profiles were collected before and after annealing on each individual sample by EAG Eurofins.
Depth was calibrated
by measured crater depths and concentrations using ion implanted composition standards.
Comparing multiple SIMS
profiles from each sample and between samples as well as
x-ray diffraction Pendellosung fringes allowed us to quantify the uncertainty in depth scales, resulting primarily from
growth rate variation, of at most ∆x = ±6%. This translates
to relative uncertainty in extracted diffusion constants of order (∆x)2=0.4%, which we expect is much smaller than uncertainties from sample to sample variations in doping and
defects. The annealing temperature accuracy at the location
of the samples was measured to be within a few degrees of
nominal.
Isovalent aluminum and gallium have similar ionic radii,
therefore we assume a substitutional, vacancy mediated diffusion mechanism for Al. Somewhat surprisingly, numerical
treatment of the case of non-steady-state vacancy-mediated
diffusion, which amounts to assuming that the tracer diffusion “constant” varies in space and time, is not widely considered. Thus, a novel numerical approach based on the CrankNicholson scheme (2nd order centered finite differences in
space, forward and linear in time) was developed. The local Al diffusion constant DAl is assumed to be Arrhenius activated and proportional to the local concentration of cation
vacancies (shorthanded as [VGa] in #/cm3 acknowledging the
small Al content) and thus takes the form
DAl = Do ·exp

−Ea
kBT

= D∗·[VGa]·exp

−Ea
kBT

= Doo(T)·[VGa]
(1)
in
which
Do(cm2/s)
is
the
conventional
prefactor,
D∗(cm5/s) is a constant for all temperatures, Ea is the
Al hopping activation energy given a neighboring vacancy,

===== Page 3 =====

3
kB is Boltzmann’s constant, T is absolute temperature, and
Doo(T) = D∗exp

−Ea
kBT

is a constant at each temperature.
Fick’s 2nd law for isothermal tracer Al diffusion becomes
∂[Al]
∂t
= ∂
∂x

DAl
∂[Al]
∂x

= ∂DAl
∂x
∂[Al]
∂x +DAl
∂2[Al]
∂x2
= Doo

∂[VGa]
∂x
∂[Al]
∂x +[VGa] ∂2[Al]
∂x2

(2)
Not assuming spatial uniformity of the diffusion constant introduces the cross-derivative term involving gradients of both
[Al] and [VGa]. The 2nd order space central difference, first order forward time discretization of this equation on a uniform
grid of spacing ∆x is
uj+1
N
−uj
N
∆t
=
1
8∆x2 [uj
N−1(Dj
N−1 +4D j
N −D j
N+1)
+uj+1
N−1(Dj+1
N−1 +4D j+1
N
−Dj+1
N+1)
−8(uj
ND j
N +uj+1
N
D j+1
N
)
+uj
N+1(−D j
N−1 +4D j
N +D j
N+1)
+uj+1
N+1(−D j+1
N−1 +4D j+1
N
+D j+1
N+1)]
(3)
in which the space and time grids are indexed respectively
by the subscript (j) and superscript (N) and ∆x and ∆t are the
x and t intervals. Dirichlet and von-Neuman boundary conditions were applied for Al at the deepest points in the substrate and surface respectively. To simplify simulation, which
we implemented in Matlab27, we used analytical solutions for
diffusion of [VGa] which is tantamount to assuming vacancy
diffusion does not depend on Al concentration. This assumption was justified by the chemical similarity of Al and Ga and
the small maximum Al concentration. We find the best balance of assumptions and distinguishable differences in modeled profiles by assuming depth-constant (but distinct) initial
[VGa] conditions in the OMVPE grown layers and the substrates. Because of the high dynamic range of the SIMS data
with low uncertainty (meaning that both the peaks and valleys of the Al profiles are measured with good signal to noise
ratios), we chose to use the square difference of log10([Al])
between measured and simulated profiles (summed over the J
points in each profile) as our goodness of fit (GOF) parameter:
GOF =
1
J −3
J
∑
j=0

log10

Almodel(j)

−log10

AlSIMS(j)
2
(4)
DVGa,
the
product[VGa]subs · Doo
and
the
ratio
[VGa]epilayer/[VGa]subs are the 3 free parameters (degrees
of freedom) of each scenario directly-extractable from the
simulation/fitting and robustly determined at each temperature. Rather narrow ranges of parameter values reproduce the
Al profiles especially for the samples grown on Sn substrates.
If we assume a value for [VGa] in the substrates (discussed
below), minimizing the GOF across many diffusion simulations allows us to extract [VGa] in the epilayer, Doo for the Al
at each Tanneal, and DVGa at each T. Any difference between
actual and assumed [VGa]subs will affect [VGa]epilayer and Doo;
if the actual concentration is later found to be 10x higher
than assumed in our analysis, then Doo would actually be
10x lower but [VGa]epilayer also 10x higher.. Uncertainties in
the final extracted parameter values were estimated from the
curvature of the GOF with respect to each parameter. Further
discussion of numerical methods and error propagation are in
the Supplemental Materials.
III.
EXPECTATIONS OF VACANCY INITIAL
CONDITIONS AND INITIAL OBSERVATIONS ON AL
DIFFUSION
First we discuss expectations for the initial conditions of
concentrations of VGa in the substrates and superlattices and
then present and initially assess the SIMS data.
Intuition
for a completely ionic crystal suggests VGa should exist only
in the 3−charge state and thus have concentration scaling
∝( n
ni )3 or ∝exp
 −3Ef
kBT

28. Modern density functional theory
(DFT) with hybrid functionals accurately predicts that defect
chargestates may change if Ef moves above or below charge
transition levels and can account for complexation with other
defects5,29. At equilibrium with all other factors held constant, the concentration of VGa should be proportional to the
n-type doping concentration, however differences in chemical
potentials (e.g. pO2) and temperatures during bulk crystal and
OMVPE growth will modify this ratio.
A number of experiments have7,8,10,12,30,31 detected and
studied cation vacancies, however the most credible quantification of VGa or its complexes in Sn-doped wafers comes
from the Ec-2.0 eV signal measured by deep level optical spectrscopy (DLOS). DLOS measurements on different
but very similar OMVPE layers report a concentration of
≈1015/cm3 for the Ec-2.0 eV defects32, while DLOS measurements of Ec −2.0 eV defects in NCT Sn-doped bulk crystals are reported at 0.8 −1.2x1016/cm3 for wafers matching
the nominal concentration of those used herein, [Sn] = 3.5 −
5x1018/cm333. For analysis we assume [VGa] = 1016/cm3 vacancies in the Sn-doped substrates.
While it is possible that DLOS may not detect some vacancies bound in complexes, the near-unity doping efficiency
measured for Sn in bulk substrates in the 1018/cm3 range
indicates that [VGa] can not be much larger. Unfortunately,
junction capacitance based defect spectroscopies like DLTS
or DLOS can not be performed on insulating samples e.g.
Fe-doped wafers or oxygen annealed ones.
All substrates
were grown at Tmelt(kBT ≈0.18eV) by EFG in reduced pO2
conditions34,35. In Fe-doped Ga2O3, the Fermi level is pinned
at the Fe3+/2+ charge transition level corresponding to the 0/-
transition of the FeGa acceptor located very near Ec-0.8 eV
by DLTS and related techniques36,37. Sn-doped substrates are
degenerately doped or very close to it, thus Ef ≈Ec. For both
of these Ef values, isolated VGa should be in the q = 3−charge
state; thus [V 3−
Ga ] in the Sn-doped substrates should be higher
than in the Fe-doped by a factor of exp
  3×0.8eV
0.18eV

≈106 if [VGa]

===== Page 4 =====

4
FIG. 1. Pre- and post- annealing quantified Al, Sn, and Fe SIMS profiles for superlattices grown on (a) Sn-doped and (b) Fe-doped substrates
and annealed 20 hrs in 1 atm flowing O2 at 1050◦C. (c) 3D render of ToF SIMS of SL after annealing at 1100◦C for 20 hours (see Fig 2)
in both substrate types equilibriate at T1=Tmelt. If VGa stay
equilibrated to a T1 temperature lower than the freezing temperature, this ratio would increase, while if most of the VGa
are in (SnGa −VGa)2−complexes or (VGa −VO)−divacancy
complexes, this ratio would be approximately 104 or 100 respectively. While the unintentional doping in our OMVPE
layers grown at 800◦C is in the low 1016, it is very difficult
to predict the ratio of [VGa] in the SLs to those in the substrates because of the very different growth conditions. Also,
in separate experiments we have carried out, we find that annealing Sn-doped wafers in 1 atm O2 at 1050◦C requires approximately two weeks for full equilibration; thus [VGa] will
not equilibrate in the full wafer during OMVPE growth. Thus,
we consider ratio of [VGa] in the SL to that in the substrate to
be an unknown parameter to be determined in the fitting. Note
that the substrate may not equilibrate its [VGa] during OMVPE
growth, so the ratio between substrate and SL may not have
this value. Despite the nominally-identical growth of the superlattices, the initial conditions for the VGa or complexes mediating Al diffusion may be different from run to run, for those
grown on Fe or Sn doped substrates, and from individual substrate to substrate.
Figure 1a,b shows Al and dopant SIMS profiles before and
after annealing for 20 hours in 1 atm O2 at 1050◦C for two
identical superlattices grown on Sn- or Fe-doped substrates.
For the SLs on Fe-doped substrates, Al diffuses without any
detectable gradient in the extent of diffusion of the AlGa2O3
layers in the superlattices. Meanwhile, for SLs on Sn-doped
substrates the extent of Al diffusion is greater for AlGaO layers closer to the substrate than the surface, and overall the
Al diffusion is much faster. This is consistent with a larger
[VGa] in the Sn-doped substrates compared to the SLs and
to that in the Fe-doped substrates which diffuses through the
SLs towards the surface on a non-negligible timescale compared to the annealing time. For both types of samples, we
find no evidence for vacancy creation or in-diffusion from the
free surface at concentrations sufficient to affect Al diffusion
from about 5 at.% down to 1018/cm3. Such an effect could
be taking place, but apparently at concentrations significantly
lower than the estimated 1016/cm3 from the Sn-doped substrates. In the case of Fe-doped substrates, VGa diffusion could
be much faster than the time required for Al diffusion at the
given VGa concentration such that it does equilibrate quickly
compared to the experimental time. As discussed later, SnGa
donors form complexes with acceptor-like VGa but acceptorlike FeGa do not; therefore we should expect isolated VGa to
diffuse faster through SLs grown on Fe-doped substrates.
IV.
ANALYSIS OF AL AND FE DIFFUSION FOR SLS ON
FE-DOPED SUBSTRATES
For SLs on Fe-doped substrates, uniform [VGa] in the SL
and substrate eliminates the cross-derivative term in Eq. 2
for the Al diffusion, reducing it to the usual form of Fick’s
2nd law. We tried many scenarios of different [VGa] in SL
and substrate but the best agreement with experiments was
found for the case of the same, low concentrations. Evolving the initial to final Al SIMS profiles for the sample annealed at 1050◦C allows us to extract a value of DAl = Doo(T)·
[VGa] = 3.5x10−18cm2/s, assuming [VGa] = 1014/cm3, i.e.,
≈100 times less than the substrate value used for Sn doped
substrates.
The diffusion of Fe itself appears to be complex, probably involving at least two modes such as both interstitial
and substitutional. The difference between the integrated Fe
concentration in the epi-layer, before and after annealing, is
≈8.4x1013/cm2. Of this, 8.0x1013/cm2 accumulated near the
surface, which we have shown to be neither a SIMS artifact or
a result of vapor transport during annealing (See supplemental
for details). This effect was reproduced via dynamic and Time
of Flight (TOF) SIMS, across multiple samples, and is also
reproduced on Sn doped substrates where [Fe] is initially considerably lower in the substrate. The remaining 4x1012/cm2

===== Page 5 =====

5
Fe that diffused only short distances into the SL region apparently diffuses via a second mode. Assuming this corresponds
to diffusion of Fe into a long half-space without complexation
yields the analytical solution to Fick’s 2nd law38:
C(x,t) = Csubs −CSL
2

1+er f
x−xL
√
Dt

(5)
in which Csubs,CSL are the initial [Fe] concentrations in
the substrate and SL respectively, xL is the depth of the
SL/substrate interface, and D is the diffusion constant for free
Fe. The best fit of this equation, excluding the [Fe] near the
surface, yields a diffusion constant of DFe = 6x10−16cm2/s.
The diffusion of Fe in Ga2O3 certainly warrants additional
experimental and theoretical scrutiny, including Fermi level
effects. Fe is present at appreciable concentrations in most if
not all Ga2O3 bulk crystals as an impurity introduced from
raw materials or Ir crucibles and dies39.
V.
DIFFUSION OF AL IN ALGA2O3/GA2O3 SLS ON
SN-DOPED SUBSTRATES
Figure 2 a-c) present initial and final SIMS profiles for [Al]
for samples annealed at 1000, 1050, and 1100◦C for 20 hours.
The extent of Al diffusion within each SL is greater near the
substrate than near the surface indicating that the local concentration of [VGa] was non-uniform and greater near the substrate for a significant portion of the annealing time. Samples
A and B were grown in the same OMVPE growth run, while C
was grown in a different run; this is important for understanding the apparently lesser degree of Al diffusion despite this
sample’s higher annealing temperature, as discussed in more
detail below. Figure 2 d and e reproduce the data from a)
but also overlay simulated Al concentration profiles at 2 hour
intervals (red solid) for the best-fit parameters within two assumptions for VGa diffusion (green dashed) described in the
following.
Diffusion parameter estimation from each experiment was
accomplished by evolving the measured initial Al SIMS profile forward in time under many scenarios and fitting the final
SIMS profiles. Each tested scenario is defined by Eqs. 1-2, assumed initial [VGa] in SL and substrate, [VGa] diffusion behavior explained below, and values for Doo for Al and DVGa. It is
clear for all Sn-doped samples that the initial [VGa] in the SLs
must be at least 10 times lower than in the substrates which
agrees with intuition given the higher substrate n-type doping.
The effects of DVGa and the initial [VGa] ratio on the broadening and peak-to-valley [Al] ratio for each Al-containing layer
in the SLs are sufficiently distinct that we can determine their
values with low uncertainty within each scenario. As shown
in Figure 2 d), we first tested the hypotheses that a) VGa are
conserved and b) that they diffuse freely without interactions
from the Sn-doped substrate through the SLs according to Eq.
538:
C(x,t) =











Csubs
if C(x,t) > Csubs
Cepi
if C(x,t) < Cepi
Cmax
2

1+ x−xL
√
Dt

if Cepi ≥C(x,t)..
and C(x,t) ≥Csubs
(6)
in which Csubs,CSL are the initial vacancy concentrations
in the substrate and SL respectively, xL is the depth of the
SL/substrate interface, D is the diffusion constant for free vacancies, and t is the isothermal annealing time. In the supplemental materials we explore the issue of VGa conservation
and implications for assumptions that vacancies equilibrate in
other single crystal diffusion experiments. Our simulations
reproduced the Al SIMS data fairly well indicating that these
two assumptions capture the gross features of VGa diffusion in
our experiments; no generation of VGa in the SLs or introduction from the free surface are indicated at levels detectable in
these experiments.
However, theoretical and experimental evidence21,29 suggest that VGa in Sn doped substrates dynamically complex
with a small fraction of the available Sn ([VGa]«[SnGa]). Complexed VGa diffuse slower than free VGa, while SnGa diffuse only while complexed or correlated with a vacancy19 .
Critically for assessing how this will affect Al diffusion, the
SnGa −VGa complexation reaction’s equilibrium rate constant
was determined to be small. [Sn] is roughly 100-1000 times
higher than [VGa] in the substrate, which ensures that the majority of VGa is on average bound in SnGa −VGa complexes.
However, the small equilibrium rate constant ensures that individual SnGa−VGa complexes are constantly dissociating and
reforming. Therefore, VGa in the vicinity of Al has a high
likelihood of assisting in Al diffusion even when the VGa is
diffusing as a complex. Because any ionized donor will have
Coulomb attraction to cation vacancies, the effective diffusion
constant for VGa and thus for cation self-diffusion in the presence of donors such as Sn should be smaller the value in intrinsic or acceptor-doped β-Ga2O3 (e.g. Fe-doped). The degree
of retardation of cation vacancy diffusion will depend on the
concentrations of donors and vacancies and thus be variable
from experiment to experiment and vs depth and time within
any diffusion experiment.
Figure 2 e) shows fitting of one data set using a modified assumption for the evolution of [VGa](x,t), taking into account
its complexation with SnGa. Frodason et al.21 studied the diffusion of Sn from (001) Sn-doped substrates into UID HVPEgrown Ga2O3 for temperatures 1050 to 1250◦C and fit them
with a diffusion-reaction model. A key assumption of their
work was that [VGa] equilibrated quickly by unspecified generation or transport mechanisms with the local Fermi level set
by the local doping – i.e. that
R [VGa]dx was not conserved.
In Ref.21 (and in some similar intermediate Sn d-SIMS profiles obtained in this work but not shown herein) Sn appears
on a log scale to diffuse as a nearly-rigid step with maximum
slope set by the temperature but not time. In the Supplemental Materials we develop an analytical approximation for the
x and t evolution of both [SnGa] and [VGa] within for this RD process during isothermal annealing. Remarkably, this is

===== Page 6 =====

6
FIG. 2. (A-C) SIMS profiles of Al before (blue) and after (red) annealing for 20 hours at the indicated temperatures. (D-E) initial and final
SIMS data from 1000◦C sample with results of finite differences simulation shown in red for 2 hour increments under the assumption that VGa
diffuses as er f(x,t) (D) or as piece-wise linear solution to the SnGa −VGa complex reaction-diffusion (E) A and B were grown in the same
OMVPE growth, while (C) was grown in a different run. The initial SIMS Al profiles were used as initial conditions for the finite differences
code with space- and time-varying diffusion constants and evolved to the final time; computed profiles are shown in red for increments of 2
hours. Goodness of fit values were computed for the final profiles sweeping a large range of the model parameter space in order to determine
the best values of VGa initial step-function profiles, VGa diffusion constant, and proportionality constant between [VGa] and DAl. The assumed
initial VGa step function profile is evolved using either the er f() assumption or the piece-wise-linear approximation to the reaction diffusion
of complexes, as shown in dashed green. The apparent decrease in the extent of Al diffusion between B) grown at 1050◦C and C) grown at
1100◦C is accounted for by a difference in the initial [VGa] in the substrate, as explained in Sec. V
simply a piece-wise-linear function which is initially a step
function but in which the initially vertical section pivots vs.
time such that its intercepts with the max and min values far
away front the interface move as
√
Dt (see Eq. 6). This piecewise-linear function accurately captures most of the dynamic
range of the SnGa −VGa steps from Ref.21 and our re-analysis
of those data. It only fails to capture some curvature at low
concentrations at the diffusion front leading edge and at high
concentrations in the substrate. Since Al diffusion scales with
[VGa], the details of the leading edge are not dominant. The
difference between the classical er f() solution may be seen
by comparing the dashed green lines in Fig. 2 d) and e). Essentially the best-fit model for Al diffusion assuming er f()
diffusion for [VGa] suggests a significant gradient of [VGa] (and
thus SnGa) should remain at the end of our experiments, while
the RD model and our approximation predict the [VGa] and
[Sn] should be closer to uniform at the end of the experiment.
The later is in agreement with the measured, nearly-uniform
final [Sn] profiles as exemplified by Fig. 1b). Additionally,
using the piecewise-linear RD approximation yields an order
of magnitude better GOF values and allows us to recover Arrhenius diffusion behavior for both Al and VGa. We take these

===== Page 7 =====

7
TABLE I. Effective Al diffusion coefficient (Doo) and gallium vacancy diffusion coefficient for error function model and reaction-diffusion
(R-D) linear model for SLs grown on Sn and Fe doped (010) β-Ga203 and annealed at 1000, 1050 and 1100◦C. In the Fe a uniform initial VGa
profile is assumed so now value for DV Ga is reported. Doo is given assuming indicated initial values for [VGa] in SL and substrate as explained
in Sec. V.
Sample
Dopant
Diffusion
Model
Anneal
Temp (◦C)
Doo(cm5/s)
DVGa(cm2/s)
Initial [VGa] in
SL (cm−3)
Initial [VGa] in
Substrate (cm−3)
GoF
SnA
Sn
Erf
1000
7.0±0.5x10−31
6±1x10−14
0
1016
0.01185
SnA
Sn
Linear
1000
6.0±0.5x10−31
4±1x10−13
0
1016
0.01542
SnB
Sn
Erf
1050
2.7±0.1x10−30
6±1x10−14
0
1016
0.00956
SnB
Sn
Linear
1050
2.7±0.2x10−30
4±0.3x10−13
0
1016
0.00528
SnC
Sn
Erf
1100
8.0±1.0x10−30
4±1x10−14
2.0x1013
2x1015
0.01244
SnC
Sn
Linear
1100
8.0±1.0x10−30
1.4±0.2x10−12
0
2x1015
0.01953
Fe
Fe
NA
1050
3.5±0.5x10−32
N/A
0
1016
0.05188
facts to be strong indicators that the piecewise RD approximation for VGa diffusion more accurately reflects the actual
VGa diffusion in these SLs. The magnitude of of DVGa extracted from under the RD model show remarkable agreement
with DSn in21 despite DVGa being extracted from our [Al] profiles and DSn in theirs from [Sn] profiles, indicating that in
both cases the diffusivity of SnGaVGa complexes or at least the
interactions between SnGa and VGa determine the is the rate
limiting step(s).
The lack of evidence for [VGa] in-diffusion from the free
surface in our [Al] data herein raises a question for future
investigations: what sources, sinks, and transport processes
for [VGa] operate in order to establish equilibration with local Fermi levels and pO2 during annealing and growth? The
creation and transport of vacancies bears further examination
in Ga2O3 and in other single crystal diffusion experiments.
However, for the immediate purpose of analyzing our Al diffusion data, this question is immaterial since the RD models
predict the free [VGa] able to facilitate Al diffusion to have
functional shape closely mimicking the Sn profile.
The Supplemental Materials contain a thorough discussion
of whether or not VGa formation in the bulk or transport from
the free surface (where formation presumably has lower activation barrier) is detectable in our experiments and those of
Ref.21. Succinctly, the lower extent of diffusion of Al close
to the free surface appears to rule out large concentrations of
[VGa] being injected from that surface (“large” here being relative to at% concentrations of Al). Also, our models account
for the Al diffusion without requiring generation of VGa in
the SLs, only the diffusion of those initially present in the
substrate. In Ref.21 such mechanisms are implicit requirements of the assumption that [VGa] equilibrates with the local Fermi level. Since Sn in21 concentrations range from 1014
to 1018/cm3, these experiments are sensitive to much lower
concentrations of VGa. Thus we can only conclude that any
bulk generation or injection of VGa from the free surface must
be below the capability of the present experiments with Al to
resolve and further experiments with smaller tracer concentrations, longer times, or higher temperatures should be used to
elucidate the kinetics of VGa introduction.
From a visual comparison alone, the sample annealed at
1050◦C (Fig 2b)) shows a greater extent of diffusion than the
one annealed at 1100◦C (Fig 2c)), counter to what would be
expected for Arrhenius activation if the two samples had identical initial concentrations of [VGa].
This was initially a source of great consternation until we
realized that the sample annealed at 1100◦C (Fig 2c) ) was
grown in an earlier growth run using a different substrate,
while the samples annealed at 1000 and 1050◦C (Fig 2a,b) )
were grown at a later date on pieces of a new Sn-doped (010)
β-Ga2O3 wafer different than the one for the 1100◦C one.
[VGa] is likely to vary spatially within EFG-grown bulk crystals, thus variation from wafer to wafer may occur. Likewise,
despite using nominally the same growth recipe for all three
samples, some variation is reasonably likely in [VGa] within
the SL between growth runs. The finite difference model in
Sec. II ultimately depends on DAl(x,t) as defined in Eq. 1;
thus fitting via simulation does not directly measure [VGa].
Thus in our final analysis, we assumed [VGa] = 1016/cm3 in
the substrates for the 1000 and 1050◦C annealed samples, but
explored possibilities that the substrate for the 1000◦C sample
had a different [VGa]. In all cases, the value of [VGa] in the SL
was determined independently for each sample through the
fitting process. After testing a wide range of scenarios, the
smaller value of DAl = Doo · [VGa] for the sample annealed at
1100◦C is best explained by lower initial [VGa] in that sample’s
substrate compared to the samples (from a different OMVPE
growth and cut from a different wafer) annealed at 1000 and
1050◦C. After accounting for this difference in [VGa], and
rerunning simulations with initial [VGa] in the substrate reduced from 1016/cm3 to 2x1015/cm3, more sensible behavior for Doo(T) compatible with an Arrhenius law with activation energy 3.9 ± 0.3 eV is obtained. This emphasizes the
extreme sensitivity to the local [VGa] concentration for selfand impurity-diffusion, whilst also demonstrating the efficacy
of our modeling at extracting physically-reasonable behavior
even from samples having heterogeneous initial conditions.
The 3.9 eV activation energy for Doo(T) is comparable to the
value of 4.2 eV obtained for AlGa diffusion in (-201) β-Ga2O3
in ref40. Table I summarizes all of the parameters from bestfit scenarios under both the er f() and piece-wise-linear RD
models for the VGa diffusion (our final analysis concludes that
the later is the correct model).
In Fig.
1a,b) we compare two SLs annealed at 1050◦C

===== Page 8 =====

8
on Fe and Sn doped substrates. On the Sn doped substrate,
the best-fit scenario within the piece-wise-linear model of VGa
diffusion yields Doo = 2.7x10−30cm5/s at an initial value of
[VGa] = 1016/cm3 in the substrate. Doo for Al in the absence
of VGa complexing with Sn would be expected to be the same
or larger, depending on how significantly the presence of Sn
limits the ability of VGa to mediate Al diffusion. If we do
assume that Doo is the same for samples grown on both Feor Sn-doped substrates, we estimate the initial [VGa] in the
substrate for samples grown on Fe-doped substrates would be
1014/cm3, o r ≈100 times lower that for the Sn-doped substrates. This is on the lower end of the range of estimated
ratios based on expected Fermi level positions, but given the
lack of direct comparison data and uncertainty regarding the
effects of Sn and Fe co-diffusing with VGa, considered reasonable.
Returning to the issue of vacancy conservation, our data
and analyses point to these experiments lasting on the order
of a day or more at 1000 −1100◦C VGa diffusion occurring
over a distance of 1.5-2.5 um within a transient, not equilibrated regime. The data show no indication for in-diffusion
from the surface, the density of vacancy sources like dislocations is small (104 −105/cm2), spontaneous vacancy pair
formation has a large activation energy. These are interesting and impactful results as most analyses of similar diffusion
experiments assume that mediating native defects equilibrate
quickly compared to impurity or tracer diffusion timescales.
Herein, our evidence indicates cation vacancies remaining in
a transient diffusion regime over the 1.5-2.5 µm SL thickness
for most or all of experiments at 1000−1100◦C typically lasting about a full day (at least for concentrations necessary for
diffusion of Al at 1018 −1021/cm3 concentrations). This may
be a unique experimental case in that the homoepitaxial samples have low densities of vacancy sources/sinks (c.f. grain
boundaries or dislocations) and our diffusing species were
not introduced as reactive surface layers nor were they ion
implanted (both of which can introduce or consume mediating native defects). Higher temperatures and different chemical boundary conditions at free surfaces may change this, but
these experiments provide a valuable existence proof of cases
where this typically foundational assumption of analysis of
native defect-mediated diffusion is not fulfilled.
VI.
DIFFUSION OF UNINTENTIONAL IMPURITIES
In addition to the d-SIMS of Al, Fe, and Sn presented so
far, we also used TOF-SIMS 3D reconstructions and survey
d-SIMS detecting all elements present (at lower spatial and
concentration resolutions). The revealed that many other elements besides Fe or Sn diffused out of a Sn-doped substrate
and through the SLs. Figure 3 shows concentration-calibrated
SIMS profiles for five illustrative metals present in the SL
shown in Fig. 2b), annealed at 1000◦C. After collecting the 20
hour anneal SIMS profile shown in Fig. 2b), the sample was
immersed in aqua regia for 10 minutes to remove any possibility of metal contamination at the surface, and then annealed
in O2 for an additional 10 hours (total 30 hours) as part of efFIG. 3. Low spatial and concentration resolution “survey” SIMS
profiles of five species which show high concentration and nonhomogenous behavior for SL on Sn doped substrate annealed at
1000◦C for 30 hours in oxygen. Each survey is fit with a univariate spline function (solid line).
forts to eliminate possibilities of Fe contamination depositing
on the surface and then diffusing into the SL while annealing
inside the tube furnace (Supplemental Materials). Given the
known presence of many of these elements in wafers grown
from melts held in Ir crucibles- e.g. EFG35,39 and the high
purity of OMVPE-grown layers, we infer that these elements
diffused into the SLs from the substrate.
Mn, Fe and Ni accumulate at the surface at concentrations,
and to depths, which are unlikely to be due to artifacts. [Cu]
exhibits a concentration peak around the middle of the superlattice structure, perhaps indicating interactions between its
charge states and the Fermi level within a space charge region.
All of these transition metals are likely capable of multiple interstitial and substitutional diffusion modes in multiple charge
states. Ti was also detected at 1016/cm3 uniform in depth
through the d-SIMS survey scan, while Si and Na were also
detected in TOF SIMS. Li being extremely small is suspected
to be capable of fast interstitial diffusion and is depleted rather
than enriched close to the surface. These different behaviors
are consistent with an electro-chemical potential gradient affecting different elements and charge states differently near
the surface. A depletion width and built-in potential φ(x) induced by surface Fermi-level pinning is the simplest example

===== Page 9 =====

9
and defects with different relative charges q would accumulate or deplete as exp

qφ(x)
kBT

self-consistently following the
Poisson-Boltzmann equation. However, it has been frequently
observed that β-Ga2O3 surfaces, especially in the presence
of additional impurities, can change to the different γ-Ga2O3
phase which would of course change the chemical potential
for each impurity, perhaps causing them to accumulate. Further analysis of these profiles is beyond the scope of this work,
but the diffusion of these impurities, some like Cu and Li being notoriously fast diffusers in semiconductors, calls for further quantification of impurities and their diffusion in multiple
phases of Ga2O3 and in devices from fabrication to long-term
degradation under high fields and temperatures.
VII.
CONTEXTUALIZING RESULTS
Figure 4 compares measured and computed diffusivities in
Ga2O3 from this work and that from literature. Red pentagons
and triangles give the diffusivities inferred in this work for VGa
assuming no interaction with Sn (erf) and coupled reactiondiffusion with Sn (piece-wise linear). DVGa extracted from
our Al diffusion data over the investigated temperature range
assuming only the piece-wise linear shape of the [VGa](x,t)
evolution (making no assumptions of diffusion constant) have
remarkable agreement with the diffusion of SnGa −VGa complexes reported by Frodason21 and follow a sensible Arrhenius trend with activation energy 1.86±1.13eV The values extracted from best-fits at different temperatures assuming free
diffusion (er f(x,t)) are an order of magnitude lower and deviate from Arrhenius behavior. Blue rhombuses plot the modeled values of free diffusion of uncomplexed DVGa from Ref21.
It is clear that interactions of acceptor-like VGa especially with
donor-like defects significantly slows their diffusion.
Since Al diffusion is proportional to [VGa] and this varies
with depth and time in the SLs on Sn-doped substrates, we
present DAl extracted for each temperature, assuming a uniform concentration local [VGa] = 1016/cm3.
To emphasize
the dependence of DAl on local [VGa] we also give a second
dataset for DAl assuming a uniform local [VGa] = 1014/cm3.
This latter set gives good agreement in magnitude with DAl
derived from the interdiffusion of a thin Al2O3 layer on Ga2O3
during oxygen annealing40. The data shown as an inverted
brown triangle is the value for the extracted diffusion constants for the slow diffusion channel of Fe out of an Fe-doped
substrate. This value is similar to those experienced by Al, so
we speculate may be vacancy- mediated but modified by the
expected Coulomb repulsion between VGa and FeGa acceptors compared to the case of Al. Further detailed studies will
be needed to understand the diffusion of Fe and other metals
prone to charge state changes and possibly diffusing by multiple mechanisms simultaneously.
Oshima et al., used capacitance methods to measure the expansion of an insulating layer on the surface of n-type samples
up to a few µm thickness during O2 annealing. The kinetics of
layer thickening were consistent with a diffusion-limited process, thus we plot their equivalent diffusion constant as blue
circles. It is very interesting to note that these extracted diffusion constants are much closer to the values for impurities
like Al or Fe diffusing to the surface in our samples than they
are to any of the cation vacancy diffusion constants or oxygen
tracer diffusion constants recently reported. Thus, we speculate that at least part of the phenomenology of insulating layers forming on the surface of n-type Ga2O3 crystals may be
caused by out-diffusion of unintentional cation impurities towards the O-rich boundary condition, possible surface band
bending, and possibly phase changes to g-Ga2O3 with impurity pile-up, rather than directly by in-diffusion of O or Ga
native defects as the simplest models might assume. Clearly,
there are many questions to be explored with direct experiment and theory in the diffusion and annealing behavior of
native defects and impurities in Ga2O3. Our results point out
many places where unchallenged assumptions regarding native defect processes in diffusion experiments should be revisited and directly tested.
VIII.
CONCLUSIONS
While many papers have shown a correlation between gallium vacancies and n-type carrier concentration after oxygen
annealing, the exact dynamics of this process have not previously been explored. We have shown via Al tracer diffusion, that VGa are available in great numbers in Sn doped substrates, diffusing outward towards the epi-layers in our SL experiments. However, the rate of diffusion is much faster than
that indicated for the formation of the semi-insulating layer
measured by Oshima. We developed a modified finite difference scheme in which the diffusion of impurities such as Al
is dependent on the concentration of VGa, which is also diffusing. The finite differences model herein developed shows
no evidence of Ga vacancies being introduced from the surface, though these may be introduced at lower concentrations.
The measured diffusion rates extracted for VGa are far lower
than those predicted for free vacancies based on DFT calculations. Instead they agree well with the measured rates of Sn
diffusion, indicating that the formation and diffusion of defect
complexes is the primary rate controlling step in the diffusion
of the charge-neutral Al defects. The study of unintentionally introduced impurities like Fe, Mn, Cu must be explored
further, and may yet play an important role in elucidating the
formation of the semi-insulating layer. The accumulation of
transition metals at the surface suggests that the effect of the
surface potential must be taken into account in future work.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was funded by the Air Force Office of Scientific
Research – Multidisciplinary Research Program of the University Research Initiative (MURI) – AFOSR award number
FA9550-18-1-0507. We thank EAG Eurofins for their assistance in SIMS analysis. We also thank Northrop GrummanSynoptics for the supply of β-Ga2O3 boule pieces. We thank
Dr. Klaus Magnus Johansen and Dr. Ymir K. Frodason for

===== Page 10 =====

10
FIG. 4. Arrhenius plot for the extent of formation of semi-insulating layer by Oshima et al.6 (blue circle), the assumed DVGa and DSnGaVGa
extracted from best fit in work by Frodason et al21 (blue rhombus and triangle respectively), and from this work: DVGa extracted from the Al
tracer diffusion under free, error function diffusion model and linear reaction diffusion model (red pentagons and red triangles respectively).
Based on our extracted values of Doo(T) for Al, we present DAl for two concentrations of VGa (see Eq. 1): [VGa] = 1016cm−3 appropriate
for Al in Sn-doped wafers (solid purple squares) and [VGa] = 1014cm−3 appropriate for semi-insulating or oxygen annealed samples (half
filled purple square). The later agrees well with recently published data by Uhlendorf and Schmitt40, further strengthening the case for validity
of our values. DFe extracted from the slow-diffusing component in Fig 1a, is shown as inverted orange triangles. In addition, D0
Si from41 is
shown as brown crossed-circles; this follows a similar activation energy but is apparently slightly slower than the diffusion of (SnGa −VGa)
complexes.
the use of their data and modeling of SnGa and VGa reactiondiffusion. We thank Prof. Danny Feezell and his group at
UNM for high-resolution Xray diffraction scans on early samples to help characterize the growth rate variations.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The data that support the findings of this study are available
within the article [and its supplementary material].
1S. J. Pearton, J. Yang, P. H. Cary, F. Ren, J. Kim, M. J. Tadjer, and M. A.
Mastro, “A review of ga2o3 materials, processing, and devices,” 5, 011301,
publisher: American Institute of Physics.
2A. J. Green, J. Speck, G. Xing, P. Moens, F. Allerstam, K. Gumaelius,
T. Neyer, A. Arias-Purdue, V. Mehrotra, A. Kuramata, K. Sasaki, S. Watanabe, K. Koshi, J. Blevins, O. Bierwagen, S. Krishnamoorthy, K. Leedy,
A. R. Arehart, A. T. Neal, S. Mou, S. A. Ringel, A. Kumar, A. Sharma,
K. Ghosh, U. Singisetti, W. Li, K. Chabak, K. Liddy, A. Islam, S. Rajan,
S. Graham, S. Choi, Z. Cheng,
and M. Higashiwaki, “β-gallium oxide
power electronics,” 10, 029201.
3J. Y. Tsao, S. Chowdhury, M. A. Hollis, D. Jena, N. M. Johnson, K. A.
Jones, R. J. Kaplar, S. Rajan, C. G. Van de Walle, E. Bellotti, C. L. Chua,
R. Collazo, M. E. Coltrin, J. A. Cooper, K. R. Evans, S. Graham, T. A.
Grotjohn, E. R. Heller, M. Higashiwaki, M. S. Islam, P. W. Juodawlkis,
M. A. Khan, A. D. Koehler, J. H. Leach, U. K. Mishra, R. J. Nemanich,
R. C. N. Pilawa-Podgurski, J. B. Shealy, Z. Sitar, M. J. Tadjer, A. F.
Witulski, M. Wraback,
and J. A. Simmons, “Ultrawide-bandgap semiconductors: Research opportunities and challenges,” 4, 1600501, _eprint:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/aelm.201600501.
4T. Oshima, T. Okuno, N. Arai, N. Suzuki, S. Ohira, and S. Fujita, “Vertical
solar-blind deep-ultraviolet schottky photodetectors based on β-ga 2 o 3
substrates,” 1, 011202 ().
5J. B. Varley, J. R. Weber, A. Janotti, and C. G. Van de Walle, “Oxygen
vacancies and donor impurities in β-ga2o3,” 97, 142106, publisher: American Institute of Physics.
6T. Oshima, K. Kaminaga, A. Mukai, K. Sasaki, T. Masui, A. Kuramata,
S. Yamakoshi, S. Fujita, and A. Ohtomo, “Formation of semi-insulating
layers on semiconducting β-ga 2 o 3 single crystals by thermal oxidation,”
52, 051101 ().
7F. Tuomisto and I. Makkonen, “Defect identification in semiconductors
with positron annihilation: Experiment and theory,” 85, 1583–1631, publisher: American Physical Society.
8E. Korhonen, F. Tuomisto, D. Gogova, G. Wagner, M. Baldini, Z. Galazka,
R. Schewski, and M. Albrecht, “Electrical compensation by ga vacancies in
ga2o3 thin films,” 106, 242103, publisher: American Institute of Physics.
9M. E. Ingebrigtsen, A. Y. Kuznetsov, B. G. Svensson, G. Alfieri, A. Mihaila,
U. Badstübner, A. Perron, L. Vines, and J. B. Varley, “Impact of proton
irradiation on conductivity and deep level defects in β-ga2o3,” 7, 022510
(), publisher: American Institute of Physics.
10J. Jesenovec, M. H. Weber, C. Pansegrau, M. D. McCluskey, K. G. Lynn,
and J. S. McCloy, “Gallium vacancy formation in oxygen annealed βga2o3,” 129, 245701.
11Y. K. Frodason, C. Zimmermann, E. F. Verhoeven, P. M. Weiser, L. Vines,
and J. B. Varley, “Multistability of isolated and hydrogenated ga–o divacancies in β - ga 2 o 3,” 5, 025402 ().

===== Page 11 =====

11
12A. Karjalainen, P. M. Weiser, I. Makkonen, V. M. Reinertsen, L. Vines,
and F. Tuomisto, “Interplay of vacancies, hydrogen, and electrical compensation in irradiated and annealed n -type β -ga 2 o 3,” 129, 165702.
13A. Kyrtsos, M. Matsubara, and E. Bellotti, “Migration mechanisms and
diffusion barriers of vacancies in ga 2 o 3,” 95, 245202.
14R. Sun, Y. K. Ooi, P. Ranga, A. Bhattacharyya, S. Krishnamoorthy, and
M. A. Scarpulla, “Oxygen annealing induced changes in defects within
β-ga2o3 epitaxial films measured using photoluminescence,” 54, 174004,
publisher: IOP Publishing.
15R.
A.
De
Souza
and
J.
A.
Kilner,
“Oxygen
transport
in
la1-xSrxMn1-yCoyO3±δ perovskites: Part i. oxygen tracer diffusion,”
106, 175–187.
16J. Töpfer, S. Aggarwal, and R. Dieckmann, “Point defects and cation tracer
diffusion in (CrxFe1 - x)3 - δo4 spinels,” 81, 251–266.
17R. E. Howard, “Random-walk method for calculating correlation factors:
Tracer diffusion by divacancy and impurity-vacancy pairs in cubic crystals,”
144, 650–661, publisher: American Physical Society.
18P.
Klugkist
and
C.
Herzig,
“Tracer
diffusion
of
titanium
in
α-iron,”
148,
413–421,
_eprint:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/pssa.2211480209.
19H. Mehrer, Diffusion in Solids:
Fundamentals, Methods, Materials,
Diffusion-Controlled Processes (Springer Science & Business Media)
google-Books-ID: IUZVffQLFKQC.
20K. Johansen, L. Vines, T. Bjørheim, R. Schifano, and B. Svensson, “Aluminum migration and intrinsic defect interaction in single-crystal zinc oxide,” 3, 024003, publisher: American Physical Society.
21Y. K. Frodason, P. P. Krzyzaniak, L. Vines, J. B. Varley, C. G. Van de Walle,
and K. M. H. Johansen, “Diffusion of sn donors in β-ga2o3,” 11, 041121
().
22H. Bracht, “Diffusion mechanisms and intrinsic point-defect properties in
silicon,” 25, 22–27.
23U. M. Gösele and T. Y. Tan, “Point defects and diffusion in semiconductors,” 16, 42–46.
24B. Hobbs and A. Ord, “Chapter 9 - visco-plastic flow,” in Structural Geology, edited by B. Hobbs and A. Ord (Elsevier) pp. 287–326.
25D. Krasikov and I. Sankin, “Beyond thermodynamic defect models: A
kinetic simulation of arsenic activation in CdTe,” 2, 103803, publisher:
American Physical Society.
26L. Onsager, “Reciprocal relations in irreversible processes. i.” 37, 405–426,
publisher: American Physical Society.
27“MATLAB version: 9.13.0 (r2022b),” .
28K. Jacobs, “F. a. kröger. the chemistry of imperfect crystals. 2nd revised
edition, volume 1: Preparation, purification, crystal growth and phase theory. north-holland publishing company - amsterdam/london 1973 american
elsevier publishing company, inc. - new york 313 seiten, zahlreiche abbildungen und tabellen, kunstleder preis dfl. 70.00,” 9, K67–K68, _eprint:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/crat.19740090719.
29J. B. Varley, “First-principles calculations 2,” in Gallium Oxide: Materials Properties, Crystal Growth, and Devices, Springer Series in Materials
Science, edited by M. Higashiwaki and S. Fujita (Springer International
Publishing) pp. 329–348.
30H. J. von Bardeleben, G. He, Y. Wu, and S. Ding, “High temperature annealing of n-type bulk β-ga2o3: Electrical compensation and defect analysis—the role of gallium vacancies,” 134, 165702.
31F. Tuomisto, “Identification of point defects in multielement compounds
and alloys with positron annihilation spectroscopy: Challenges and opportunities,” 15, 2100177.
32H. Ghadi, J. F. McGlone, C. M. Jackson, E. Farzana, Z. Feng, A. F. M.
A. U. Bhuiyan, H. Zhao, A. R. Arehart, and S. A. Ringel, “Full bandgap
defect state characterization of β-ga2o3 grown by metal organic chemical
vapor deposition,” 8, 021111, publisher: American Institute of Physics.
33J. M. Johnson, Z. Chen, J. B. Varley, C. M. Jackson, E. Farzana,
Z. Zhang, A. R. Arehart, H.-L. Huang, A. Genc, S. A. Ringel,
C.
G.
Van
de
Walle,
D.
A.
Muller,
and
J.
Hwang,
“Unusual
formation
of
point-defect
complexes
in
the
ultrawideband-gap
semiconductor
$\ensuremath{\beta}\text{\ensuremath{-
}}{\mathrm{Ga}}_{2}{\mathrm{O}}_{3}$,”
9,
041027,
publisher:
American Physical Society.
34Z. Galazka, R. Uecker, K. Irmscher, M. Albrecht, D. Klimm, M. Pietsch,
M. Brützam, R. Bertram, S. Ganschow,
and R. Fornari, “Czochralski
growth and characterization of β-ga2o3 single crystals,” 45, 1229–1236,
_eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/crat.201000341.
35A. Kuramata, K. Koshi, S. Watanabe, Y. Yamaoka, T. Masui, and S. Yamakoshi, “High-quality β-ga2o3 single crystals grown by edge-defined
film-fed growth,” 55, 1202A2, publisher: IOP Publishing.
36Z. Zhang, E. Farzana, A. R. Arehart, and S. A. Ringel, “Deep level defects
throughout the bandgap of (010) β-ga2o3 detected by optically and thermally stimulated defect spectroscopy,” 108, 052105, publisher: American
Institute of Physics.
37M. E. Ingebrigtsen, J. B. Varley, A. Y. Kuznetsov, B. G. Svensson, G. Alfieri, A. Mihaila, U. Badstübner, and L. Vines, “Iron and intrinsic deep
level states in ga2o3,” 112, 042104 ().
38J. Crank, “The mathematics of diffusion,”.
39J. S. McCloy, J. Jesenovec, B. Dutton, C. Pansegrau, C. Remple, M. H. Weber, S. Swain, M. McCluskey, and M. Scarpulla, “Growth and defect characterization of doped and undoped β-ga2o3 crystals,” in Oxide-based Materials and Devices XIII, edited by F. H. Teherani and D. J. Rogers (SPIE)
p. 10.
40J. Uhlendorf and H. Schmidt, “Oxygen and aluminum tracer diffusion in
$(\ensuremath{-}201)$ oriented $\ensuremath{\beta}\text{\ensuremath{-
}}\mathrm{G}{\mathrm{a}}_{2}{\mathrm{O}}_{3}$ single crystals,” 7,
093402, publisher: American Physical Society.
41A. Azarov, V. Venkatachalapathy, L. Vines, E. Monakhov, I.-H. Lee, and
A. Kuznetsov, “Activation energy of silicon diffusion in gallium oxide:
Roles of the mediating defects charge states and phase modification,” 119,
182103, publisher: American Institute of Physics.
